
1:       Epicureanism

The ancient biography
of Epicurus
The Life of Epicurus: Diogenes Laertius                               [1-1]
10.1-16 (selections)
   1. Epicurus, son of Neocles and Chairestrate, was an Athenian citizen
of the deme Gargettus and of the clan Philaidae, according to Metrodorus
in his On Noble Birth. It is said, especially by Heracleides in his summary
of Sotion, that he was raised on Samos after the Athenians sent colonists
there; that at eighteen years of age he went to Athens, when Xenocrates
was in [charge of] the Academy and Aristotle was spending time in
Chalcis; that he went to join his father in Colophon when Alexander of
Macedon had died and Perdiccas expelled the Athenians [from Samos];
2. that he spent some time there and gathered students around him, then
returned to Athens again in the archonship of Anaxicrates [307-306 B.c.];
and that up to a certain time he philosophized in conjunction with the
others, but later developed the system which bears his name and taught
his own distinctive views.
   He himself says that he began to practice philosophy when he was
fourteen years old. Apollodorus the Epicurean says, in book one of his Life
ofEpicurus, that he turned to philosophy because he was contemptuous of
the school-teachers for not being able to interpret for him the [lines
about] chaos in Hesiod. Hermippus says that he had been a grammar
teacher, but then came across Democritus' treatises and threw himself
headlong into philosophy .... 9.... There is abundant evidence of the
fellow's unsurpassed kindness to all men: his country honoured him with
bronze statues; his friends were so numerous that they could not be
counted by entire cities; all his followers were transfixed by the siren-
song of his teachings, except Metrodorus of Stratonicea, who went over
to Carneades, overburdened perhaps by his unsurpassed acts of goodness;
though nearly all the others have died out, his succession has always
persisted, one student following another in a numberless sequence of
leaders; 10. and [there is] his gratitude to his parents, kindness to his
brothers, and gentleness to his servants, as is clear both from the
                                    3
4                                                                  /-1 to /-2

provisions of his will and from the fact that they joined him in philosophiz-
ing, the most notable being the aforementioned Mus; in a word, he was
a friend to all mankind. His piety to the gods and love for his country
were too great for words. So gentlemanly was he that he did not even
participate in political life. And despite the severely troubled times then
afflicting Greece, he lived out his life there, travelling through Ionia two
or three times to see friends. And friends came to him from all over,
and lived with him in the Garden (as Apollodorus too says); and he
bought it for eighty minas.
   11. Diodes says in book three of his summary that they lived very
simply and frugally. "At any rate," he says, "they were content with a
half-pint serving of weak wine and generally their drink was water." And
that Epicurus did not think it right to put one's possessions into a common
fund, as did Pythagoras who said "friends' possessions are common";
for that sort of thing is a mark of mistrust; and if there is mistrust there
is no friendship. In his letters he himself says that he is content with
just water and simple bread. And he says, "Send me a little pot of cheese
so that I can indulge in extravagance when I wish." This was the character
of the man who taught that pleasure is the goal. ...
   12 .... According to Diodes he was most impressed by Anaxagoras
among earlier philosophers, although he opposed him on some points,
and by Archelaus, Socrates' teacher. He used to train his followers,
[Diodes] says, even to memorize his treatises.
   13. Apollodorus in his Chronology says that he studied under Nausi-
phanes and Praxiphanes. He himself denies it, and says in the letter to
Eurylochus that he is self-taught. He denies that there ever was a philo-
sopher named Leucippus, and so does Hermarchus; some, including
Apollodorus the Epicurean, say that Leucippus was Democritus' teacher.
Demetrius of Magnesia says that he studied under Xenocrates too ....
   14.... Ariston says in his life of Epicurus that he copied the Canon
straight out of the Tripod of Nausiphanes, under whom he also says he
studied, in addition to Pamphilus the Platonist in Samos. And that he
began to philosophize at the age of twelve and founded his school at the
age of 32.
   He was born, according to Apollodorus in his Chronology, in the third
year of the 109th Olympiad, in the archonship of Sosigenes [341 B.c.]
on the seventh day of the month of Gamelion, seven years after Plato's
death. 15. When he was 32 he first founded a school in Mytilene and
Lampsacus [and stayed] for five years. Then he moved to Athens and
died there in the second year of the 127th Olympiad in the archonship
ofPytharatus [271-270 B.c.], at the age of72. Hermarchus, son of Agem-
ortus, of Mytilene, took over the school.
The Extant Letters                                                         5

   He died of kidney stones, as Hermarchus too says in his letters, after
an illness of fourteen days. At that point, as Hermippus also says, he got
into a bronze bathtub filled with warm water, asked for unmixed wine,
and tossed it back. 16. He then bade his friends to remember his teachings
and died thus.


The Extant Letters
   The following three letters are preserved because Diogenes Laertius
included them in his biography. They are the most important surviving
evidence for the philosophy of Epicurus. The Letter to Herodotus (I-2)
is a summary of physical doctrine; the Letter to Menoeceus (I-4) is an
even briefer summary of ethics; the authenticity of the summary of
meteorology in I-3 (Letter to Pythocles) has been questioned, but we
regard it as probably genuine.

Letter to Herodotus: Diogenes Laertius                                 [I-2]
10.34-83
   34. Epicurus to Herodotus, greetings:
   35. For the sake of those, Herodotus, who are unable to work out with
precision each and every detail of what we have written on nature and
who lack the ability to work through the longer books I have composed,
I have myself prepared an adequate summary of the entire system, to
facilitate the firm memorization of the most general doctrines, in order
that at each and every opportunity they may be able to help themselves
in the most important issues, to the degree that they retain their grasp
on the study of nature. Even those well advanced in the examination of
the universe must recall the outline of the entire system; and this outline
is structured according to basic principles. For we frequently need the
overall application [of the intellect], but not so often the detailed appli-
cation.
   36. We must, then, approach those [general points] continually, and
get into our memory an amount [of doctrine] sufficient to permit the
most vital application [of the intellect] to the facts; moreover, complete
precision on detailed points will be discovered if the general outlines are
comprehensively grasped and remembered. For even the fully expert
[student of physics] gets as the most vital benefit of complete precision
the ability to make nimble use of his applications, and <this would happen
if every point> were united in [a set of] simple principles and maxims.
For it is not possible to know the concentrated result of our continuous
6                                                                              1-2

overview of the universe unless one can have in oneself a comprehensive
grasp by means of brief maxims of all that might also be worked out in
detail with precision.
    37. Since this kind of method is useful to all those who are concerned
with the study of nature, I recommend constant activity in the study of
nature; and with this sort of activity more than any other I bring calm
to my life. That is why I have composed for you this type of summary
statement of the basic principles of the entire set of doctrines.
    First, Herodotus, we need to have grasped what is denoted by our
words, [1] so that by referring to what they denote we can make decisions
about the objects of opinion, investigation, or puzzlement and [2] so that
all of these things will not remain undecided, [as they would] if we tried
to give an infinitely long demonstration, and [3] so that our words will
not be empty. 38. For it is necessary that we look to the primary conception
corresponding to each word and that it stand in no need of demonstration,
if, that is, we are going to have something to which we can refer the
object of search or puzzlement and opinion. Again, it is also necessary
to observe all things in accordance with one's sense-perceptions, i.e.,
simply according to the present applications, whether of the intellect or
of any other of the criteria, and similarly [to observe everything] in
accordance with our actual feelings, so that we can have some sign by
which we may make inferences both about what awaits confirmation and
about the non-evident.
    After distinguishing these points we must next arrive at a general view
about the things which are non-evident. The first point is that nothing
comes into being from what is not; for [in that case] everything would
be coming into being from everything, with no need of seeds. 39. And
if that which disappears were destroyed into what is not, all things would
have been destroyed, since that into which they were dissolved does not
exist. Further, the totality [of things] has always been just like it is now
and always will be. For there is nothing for it to change into. For there
exists nothing in addition to the totality, which could enter into it and
produce the change.
    Moreover/ the totality is [made up of] <bodies and void>; for in all
cases sense-perception itself testifies that bodies exist, and it is by sense-
perception that we must infer by reasoning what is non-evident, as I
already said. 40. And if there did not exist that which we call void and
space and intangible nature, bodies would not have any place to be in
or move through, as they obviously do move. Beyond these two things

1. A scholiast in antiquity added: "He makes this point in the Major Summary at the
beginning and in book one of the On Nature."
The Extant Letters                                                                          7

[viz. bodies and void] nothing can be conceived, either by a comprehensive
grasp or analogously to things so grasped, [at least not if we mean]
grasped as complete natures rather than as what are termed properties
or accidents of these [two] things.
   Further, amon~ bodies, some are compounds, and some are those
things from which compounds have been made. 41. And these are atomic
and unchangeable, if indeed they are not all going to be destroyed into
not being but will remain firmly during the dissolutions of compounds,
being full by nature and not being subject to dissolution in any way or
fashion. Consequently the principles of bodies must be atomic natures.
   Moreover, the totality is unlimited. For what is limited has an extreme;
but an extreme is seen in contrast to something else, so that since it has
no extreme it has no limit. But since it has no limit it would be unlimited
and not limited.
   Further, the totality is unlimited in respect of the number of bodies
and the magnitude of the void. 42. For if the void were unlimited and
bodies limited, bodies would not come to a standstill anywhere but would
move in scattered fashion throughout the unlimited void, since they
would lack anything to support them or check them by collision. But if
the void were limited, the unlimited bodies would not have a place to
be in.
   In addition, the bodies which are atomic and full, from which com-
pounds both come to be and into which they are dissolved, are ungraspable
when it comes to the differences among their shapes. For it is not possible
that so many differences [in things] should come to be from the same
shapes having been comprehensively grasped. And for each type of shape
there is, quite simply, an unlimited number of similar [atoms], but with
respect to the differences they are not quite simply unlimited but only un-
graspable.
   43. 3 And the atoms move continuously4 for all time, some recoiling
far apart from one another [upon collision], and others, by contrast,
maintaining a [constant] vibration when they are locked into a compound
or enclosed by the surrounding [atoms of a compound]. 44. This is the
result of the nature of the void which separates each of them and is not


2. The scholiast adds: "This is also in book one of the On Nature and in books fourteen
and fifteen, as well as in the Major Summar:y."
3. Scholiast: "A bit later he also says that division does not go on indefinitely; and he says
since the qualities change, unless one intends simply to extend them indefinitely with
respect to their magnitudes too." This scholion is probably corrupt, and the sense is unclear.
4. Scholiast: "and he says a bit later that they also move with equal speed since the void
gives an equal yielding [i.e., lack of resistance] to the lightest and to the heaviest."
8                                                                                      1-2

able to provide any resistance; and their actual solidity causes their
rebound vibration to extend, during the collision, as far as the distance
which the entanglement [of the compound] permits after the collision.
   There is no principle for these [entities], since the atoms and the void
are eternal. 5 45. If all these points are remembered, a maxim as brief as
this will provide an adequate outline for [developing] our conceptions
about the nature of what exists.
   Moreover, there is an unlimited number of cosmoi, and some are
similar to this one and some are dissimilar. For the atoms, which are
unlimited (as was shown just now), are also carried away to very remote
distances. For atoms of the sort from which a world might come to be
or by which it might be made are not exhausted [in the production] of
one world or any finite number of them, neither worlds like this one nor
worlds unlike them. Consequently, there is no obstacle to the unlimited-
ness of worlds.
   46. Further, there exist outlines [i.e., images, eidola] which are similar
in shape to solids, only much finer than observed objects. For it is not
impossible for such compounds to come into being in the surrounding
environment, nor that there should be favourable opportunities for the
production of hollow and thin [films], nor that effluences should retain
the relative position and standing [i.e., order] that they had in the solid
objects. These outlines we call 'images'. Further, since their movement
through the void occurs with no conflict from [atoms which] could
resist them, it can cover any comprehensively graspable distance in an
inconceivably [short] time. For the presence and absence of resistance
take on a similarity to slowness and speed.
   47. The moving body itself, however, cannot reach several places at
the same time, speaking in terms of time contemplated by reason; for
that is unthinkable. Yet when considered as arriving in perceptible time
from any point at all in the unlimited, it will not be departing from the
place from which we comprehensively grasp its motion as having come
from. For it will be like resistance even if to this point we leave the speed
of the movement free from resistance. The retention of this basic principle
too is useful.
   Next, none of the appearances testifies against [the theory] that the
images have an unsurpassed fineness; and that is why they have unsur-
passed speed too, since they find every passage suitably sized for there


5. Scholiast: "He says a bit later that there are not even any qualities in atoms, except
shape and size and weight; in the Twelve Basic Principles he says that their colour changes
according to the arrangement of the atoms; and that they cannot have every magnitude-
at any rate an atom has never been seen with sense-perception."
The Extant Letters                                                                        9

being no or few [bodies] to resist their flow, whereas there is some [body]
to resist a large or infinite number of atoms.
   48. In addition, [none of the facts testifies against the claim] that the
production of images occurs as fast as thought. For there is a continuous
flow from the surface of bodies, though it is not obvious from any
reduction in bulk because the [objects are] refilled [by other atoms]; [and
this flow] preserves for quite some time the position and order of the
atoms which it had in the solid, even if it is sometimes disrupted; and
[two-dimensional] compounds are quickly produced in the surrounding
environment, since they do not need to be filled out with depth-and
there are certain other ways in which such natures [i.e., compound images]
can be produced. None of these [claims] is testified against by the senses,
providing one considers the clear facts in a certain way; one will also
refer to [the senses] the [fact that] harmonious sets [of qualities] come
to us from external objects.
   49. One must also believe that it is when something from the external
objects enters into us that we see and think about their shapes. For
external objects would not stamp into us the nature of their own colour
and shape via the air which is between us and them, nor via the rays or
any kind of flows which move from us to them, as well as [they would]
by means of certain outlines which share the colour and shape of the
objects and enter into us from them, entering the vision or the intellect
according to the size and fit [of the effluences] and moving very quickly;
50. then, for this reason, they give the presentation of a single, continuous
thing, and preserve the harmonious set [of qualities] generated by the
external object, as a result of the coordinate impact from that object [on
us], which [in turn] originates in the vibration of the atoms deep inside
the solid object. And whatever presentation we receive by a form of
application, whether by the intellect or by the sense organs, and whether
of a shape or of accidents, this is the shape of the solid object, produced
by the continuous compacting or residue of the image. Falsehood or
error always resides in the added opinion <in the case of something which
awaits> testimony for or against it but in the event receives neither
supporting testimony <nor opposing testimony>. 6
   51. For the similarity of appearances (which are like what are grasped
in a representational picture and occur either in dreams or in some other
applications of the intellect or the other criteria) to what are called real
and true things would never occur if some such thing were not added
[to the basic experience]. And error would not occur if we did not have

6. Scholiast: "According to a certain motion in ourselves which is linked to the application
to presentations but is distinct, according to which falsehood occurs."
10                                                                         /-2

some other motion too in ourselves which is linked <to the application
to presentations> but is distinct; falsehood occurs because of this, if it is
not testified for or is testified against; but if it is testified for or is not
testified against, truth occurs.
   52. One must, then, keep this doctrine too quite firmly in mind, in
order to avoid destroying the criteria of clear facts and to avoid having
error placed on an equal basis with that which has been established,
which would confound everything.
   Moreover, hearing too occurs when a flow moves from that object
which makes an utterance or produces a sound or makes a noise or in
any other way causes the auditory experience. This flow is broken into
small masses which are homogeneous with the whole which at the same
time preserve an harmonious set [of qualities] relative to each other and
also a unique kind of unity which extends back to the originating source
and, usually, produces the perceptual experience occasioned by the flow;
and if not, it only makes the external object apparent. 53. For without
some harmonious set [of qualities] coming from there, this sort of percep-
tual experience could not occur. So one must not think that the air itself
is shaped by the emitted voice or even by things of like character-for
it is far from being the case that it [i.e., air] is affected in this way by
that [i.e., voice]-but rather when we emit voice the blow which occurs
inside us precipitates the expulsion of certain masses which produce a
flow similar to breath, and which causes in us the auditory experience.
   Further, one must also believe that the [sense of] smell, like hearing
too, would never have produced any experience if there were not certain
masses moving from the object and being commensurate for the stimula-
tion of this sense organ, some of them of one sort, i.e., disturbing and
uncongenial, and some of another, i.e., non-disturbing and congenial [to
the organ of smell].
   54. Further, one must believe that the atoms bring with them none
of the qualities of things which appear except shape, weight, and size
and the [properties] which necessarily accompany shape. For every quality
changes, while the atoms do not change in any respect; for it is necessary
that during the dissolution of compounds something should remain solid
and undissolved, which will guarantee that the changes are not into what
is not nor from what is not, but come about by rearrangements in many
cases, and in some cases too by additions and subtractions [of atoms from
the compound]. That is why it is necessary that the things which are
rearranged should be indestructible and not have the nature of what
changes, but rather their own masses and configurations. For it is also
necessary that these things should remain [unchanged].
   55. For even with things in our experience which change their shapes
The Extant Letters                                                       11

by the removal [of matter], the shape is grasped as inhering in the object
which changes, while its qualities do not so inhere. The shape remains,
but the qualities are eliminated from the entire body. So these features
which are left behind [after a change] are sufficient to produce the
differences in compounds, since it is necessary that some things be left
behind and that there not be a destruction into what is not.
    Moreover, one should not believe that atoms have every [possible]
magnitude, so that one may avoid being testified against by the appear-
ances. But one should believe that there are some differences in magni-
tude. For if this [doctrine] is added, then it will be easier to account for
what, according to our feelings and sense-perceptions, actually happens.
56. But [to suppose] that every magnitude exists is not useful for [account-
ing for] the differences of qualities, and at the same time it would be
necessary that some atoms reach the point of being visible to us-which is
not seen to occur nor can one conceive how an atom could become visible.
    In addition to these points, one must not believe that there can be an
unlimited number of masses-no matter how small-in any finite body.
Consequently, not only must one eliminate unlimited division into smaller
pieces (to avoid making everything weak and being forced in our compre-
hensive grasps of compound things to exhaust the things which exist by
reducing them to non-existence), but one must also not believe that
within finite bodies there is an unlimited movement, not even by smaller
and smaller stages.
    57. For as soon as one says that there is in some thing an unlimited
number of masses, no matter how small, then one cannot think how this
magnitude could any longer be limited. For obviously these unlimited
masses must be of some size or other; and no matter how small they
might be, the magnitude [of the whole object] would for all that be
unlimited. And since the limited has an extreme which can be distin-
guished even if it cannot be observed on its own, it is impossible not to
conceive that the thing next to it is of the same character and that by
moving forward from one point to the next in this fashion it turns out
that one will in this fashion reach the unlimited conceptually.
    58. And we must conceive that the minimal perceptible [part] is neither
such as to be traversible nor is it totally and altogether unlike this. It
has something in common with things which permit of being traversed,
but [unlike them] it does not permit the distinguishing of parts [within
it]; but whenever, because of the resemblance created by what they have
in common, we think that we are going to distinguish some [part] of it-
one part here, another over there-it must be that we encounter some-
thing of equal size. We observe these one after another, starting from
the first, and not [as being] in the same place nor as touching each other's
12                                                                      /-2

parts with their own, but rather we [see] them measuring out magnitudes
in their own unique way, more of them measuring out a larger magnitude
and fewer of them a smaller.
    One must believe that the minimal part in the atom also stands in this
relation. 59. It is obvious that it is only in its smallness that it differs
from what is observed in the case of perception, but it does stand in the
same relation. For indeed it is because of this relation that we have
already asserted that the atom has magnitude, and have merely extended
it far beyond [perceptible things] in smallness. And again we must believe
that the minimal and indivisible parts are limits which provide from
themselves as primary [units] a standard of measurement for the lengths
oflarger and smaller [atoms], when we contemplate invisible things with
reason. For what they have in common with things which do not permit
of movement [across themselves] is enough to get us this far; but it is
not possible for these [minimal parts] to possess motion and so move
together [into compounds].
    60. Further, one must not assert that the unlimited has an up and a
down in the sense of an [absolutely] highest and lowest point. We know,
however, that what is over our heads from wherever we stand, or what
is below any point which we think of-it being possible to project both
indefinitely-will never appear to us as being at the same time and in
the same respect both up and down. For it is impossible to conceive of
this. Consequently, it is possible to grasp as one motion the one conceived
of as indefinitely [extended] upwards and the one conceived of as indefi-
nitely [extended] downwards, even if a thousand times over a thing
moving from us towards the places over our heads should arrive at the
feet of those above us or a thing moving from us downwards should
arrive at the head of those below us.
    61. Furthermore, it is necessary that the atoms move at equal speed,
when they move through the void and nothing resists them. For heavy
things will not move faster than small and light ones, when, that is,
nothing stands in their way; nor do small things move faster than large
ones, since they all have a passage commensurate to them, when, that
is, nothing resists these atoms either; nor is upward [movement] faster;
neither is the sideways [movement] produced by collisions faster; nor is
the downward [movement] caused by their own weight faster either. For
as long as either <of them> prevails, the motion will continue as fast as
thought, until it meets with resistance, either from an external source or
from its own weight counteracting the force of a colliding body.
    62. Moreover, with respect to compounds, some will move faster than
others, though the atoms [by themselves] move at equal speed, because
the atoms in aggregates are moving towards one place [i.e., in the same
The Extant Letters                                                          13

direction] in the shortest continuous time, even if they do not do so in
the [units of] time which reason can contemplate; but they frequently
collide, until the continuity of the motion becomes perceptible. For the
added opinion concerning the invisible-i.e., that the [units of] time
which reason can contemplate will allow for continuous motion-is not
true in such cases. For everything that is observed or grasped by the
intellect in an [act of] application is true.
    63. Next, one must see, by making reference to our sense-perceptions
and feelings (for these will provide the most secure conviction), that the
soul is a body [made up of] fine parts distributed throughout the entire
aggregate, and most closely resembling breath with a certain admixture
of heat, in one way resembling breath and in another resembling heat.
There is also the <third> part which is much finer than even these [compo-
nents] and because of this is more closely in harmony with the rest of
the aggregate too. All of this is revealed by the abilities of the soul, its
feelings, its ease of motion, its thought processes, and the things whose
removal leads to our death.
    Further, one must hold firmly that the soul is most responsible for
sense-perception. 64. But [the soul] would not have acquired this [power]
if it were not somehow enclosed by the rest of the aggregate. But the
rest of the aggregate, though it provides for the soul this cause [of sense-
perception], itself has a share in this property because of the soul; still
it does not share in all the features [of sense-perception] which the soul
has. That is why, when the soul has departed, it does not have sense-
perception. For it could not have acquired this power all by itself, but
something else which came into being with it provided body [with this
power]; and this other thing, through the power actualized in itself by
its motion, immediately produced for itself a property of sense-perception
and then gave it (because of their close proximity and harmonious relation-
ship) to the body too, as I said.
    65. That is why the soul, as long as it is in [the body], will never lack
sense-perception even if some other part has departed; but no matter
what [parts] of it are destroyed along with the container's dissolution
(whether entire or partial), ifthe soul survives it will be able to perceive.
But the rest of the aggregate-whole or part-is not able to perceive
even if it survives, when the number of atoms, however small it be, which
makes up the nature of the soul, has departed.
    Furthermore, when the entire aggregate is destroyed, the soul is scat-
tered and no longer has the same powers, nor can it move; consequently,
it does not then [in fact] have [the power of] sense-perception. 66. For
it is not possible to conceive of it as perceiving if it is not in this complex
and not executing these movements, [i.e.,] when the containing and
14                                                                                     /-2

surrounding [parts] are not such as now contain it and make possible
these motions. 7
   67. Moreover, one must also think of this, that we apply the term
'incorporeal', in the most common meaning of the term, to what could
be conceived of as independently existing. But the incorporeal cannot
be thought of as independently existing, except for the void. And the
void can neither act nor be acted upon but merely provides [the possibility
of] motion through itself for bodies. Consequently, those who say that
the soul is incorporeal are speaking to no point. For if it were of that
character, it could neither act nor be acted upon at all. But in fact both
of these properties are clearly distinguished as belonging to the soul.
   68. So, if one refers all of these calculations concerning the soul to
the feelings and sense-perceptions, and remembers what was said at the
outset, one will see the points comprehended in the outline with sufficient
clarity to be able to work out the details from this basis with precision
and certainty.
   Further, the shapes and colours and sizes and weights and all the other
things which are predicated of body as accidents, either of all [bodies]
or of visible ones, and are known by sense-perception itself, these things
must not be thought of as independent natures (for that is inconceivable).
69. Nor [must it be thought] that they are altogether non-existent, nor
that they are distinct incorporeal entities inhering in [the body], nor that
they are parts of it. But [one should think] that the whole body throughout
derives its own permanent nature from all of these [properties]-though
not in such a way as to be a compound [of them], just as when a larger
aggregate is produced from the masses themselves, whether the primary
ones or magnitudes smaller than the whole object in question-but only,
as I say, deriving its own permanent nature from all of these. But all
of these [are known by] their own peculiar forms of application and
comprehension, always in close accompaniment with the aggregate and
in no way separated from it, which is given the predicate 'body' by
reference to the aggregate conception.
   70. Further, it often happens that some impermanent properties, which
are neither invisible nor incorporeal, accompany bodies. Consequently,


7. Scholion: "Elsewhere he says that it is also composed of very smooth and very round
atoms, differing quite a bit from those of fire. And that part of it is irrational, and is
distributed throughout the rest of the body, while the rational part is in the chest, as is
evident from [feelings of] fear and joy. And that sleep occurs when the parts of the soul
which are distributed through the whole compound are fixed in place or spread apart and
then collide because of the impacts. And semen comes from the entire body."
The Extant Letters                                                                   15

using this term in the commonest sense, we make it clear that the[se]
properties neither have the nature of an entire thing, which we call a
body when we grasp it in aggregate, nor the nature of the permanent
accompaniments without which it is not possible to conceive of a body.
They would all be referred to according to certain applications of the
aggregate which accompanies [them]-71. but [only] when they are ob-
served to inhere [in bodies], since the properties are not permanent accom-
paniments [of those bodies]. And we should not eliminate this clear
evidence from what exists just because [the properties] do not have the
nature of an entire thing which happens to be what we also call a body,
nor the nature of the permanent accompaniments; but neither are they
to be regarded as independent entities, since this is not conceivable either
in their case or in the case of permanent accidents; but one must think
that they are all, just as they appear [to be], properties somehow <related
to> the bodies and not permanent accompaniments nor things which have
the status of an independent nature. But they are observed just as sense-
perception itself presents their peculiar traits.
   72. Moreover, one must also think of this very carefully: one should
not investigate time as we do the other things which we investigate in
an object, [i.e.,] by referring to the basic grasps which are observed within
ourselves, but we must reason [on the basis of] the clear experience
according to which we utter [the phrases] "for a long time" or "for a
short time" interpreting it in a manner closely connected [to our experi-
ence]. Nor must we alter the terms we use in order to 'improve' them,
but we must apply the current terms to [time]; nor must one predicate
anything else of it, as though it had the same substance as this peculiar
thing-for there are people who do this. But the best policy is to reason
solely by means of that which we associate with this peculiar thing and
by which we measure it. 73. For this needs no demonstration, but [only]
reasoning, because we associate it with days and nights and their parts,
and similarly with the feelings too and with the absence of them, and
with motions and states of rest, again, having in mind in connection with
them precisely and only this peculiar property according to which we
apply the term "time. " 8
   On top of what has been said, one must believe that the cosmoi,
and every finite compound which is similar in form to those which are
frequently seen, have come into being from the unlimited, all these things
having been separated off from particular conglomerations [of matter],
both larger and smaller; and that they are all dissolved again, some more

8. Scholiast: "He also says this in book two of the On Nature and in the Major Summary."
16                                                                                           /-2

quickly and some more slowly, and some undergoing this because of one
kind of cause, some because of others. 9
   74. Again, one must not believe that the cosmoi necessarily have one
kind of shape.... 10 For no one could demonstrate that a cosmos of one
sort would not have included the sort of seeds from which animals,
plants, and the rest of the observable things are formed as compounds,
or that a [cosmos of a] different sort could not have [included the same
things].U
   75. Further, one must suppose that [human] nature was taught a large
number of different lessons just by the facts themselves, and compelled
[by them]; and that reasoning later made more precise what was handed
over to it [by nature] and made additional discoveries-more quickly
among some peoples, and more slowly among others and in some periods
of time <making greater advances> and in others smaller ones.
   Hence, names too did not originally come into being by convention,
but the very natures of men, which undergo particular feelings and receive
particular presentations according to the tribes they live in, expelled air
in particular ways as determined by each of their feelings and presenta-
tions, in accordance too with the various local differences among their
tribes. 76. And later [the names] were established by a general convention
in each tribe, in order that their meanings might be less ambiguous for
each other and might be expressed more succinctly. And those who were
aware of certain previously unobserved things introduced them [to their
tribes] and with them handed over certain words [for the things], some
being forced to utter them, others choosing them by reasoning, following
the commonest [mode of causation], 12 and communicated [their meaning]
in this fashion.
   Moreover, when it comes to meteorological phenomena, one must
believe that movements, turnings, eclipses, risings, settings, and related
phenomena occur without any [god] helping out and ordaining or being
about to ordain [things] and at the same time having complete blessedness

9. Scholiast: "It is clear, then, that he says that the cosmoi are destructible, [this happening]
when the parts undergo change. And elsewhere he says that the earth is supported by the air."
10. There is a lacuna at this point in the text. A scholiast adds: "But he himself says in
book 12 of the On Nature that they are different: some are spherical, some egg-shaped,
and others have different sorts of shapes; but they do not have every [possible] shape. Nor
are they animals separated off from the unlimited."
11. Scholiast: "Similarly they are nourished in it. One must believe that it happens in the
same way on earth too."
12. The text may be corrupt here; the sense should be that the inventors or discoverers
followed an analogy with words already used in their own societies when deliberately
coining new terms.
The Extant Letters                                                      17

and indestructibility; 77. for troubles and concerns and anger and grati-
tude are not consistent with blessedness, but these things involve weakness
and fear and dependence on one's neighbours. Nor again can they be in
possession of blessedness if they [the heavenly bodies] are at the same
time balls of fire and adopt these movements by deliberate choice; rather,
we must preserve the complete solemnity implied in all the terms applied
to such conceptions, so that we do not generate from these terms opinions
inconsistent with their solemnity; otherwise, the inconsistency itself will
produce the greatest disturbance in our souls. Hence, one must hold the
opinion that it is owing to the original inclusion of these compounds
in the generation of the cosmos that this regularly recurring cycle too
is produced.
   78. Moreover, one must believe that it is the job of physics to work
out precisely the cause of the most important things, and that blessedness
lies in this part of meteorological knowledge and in knowing what the
natures are which are observed in these meteorological phenomena, and
all matters related to precision on this topic.
   And again, [one must accept] that in such matters there is no room
for things occurring in several ways and things which might occur other-
wise, but that anything which suggests conflict or disturbance simply
cannot occur in the indestructible and divine nature. And it is possible
to grasp with the intellect that this is unqualifiedly so.
   79. And what falls within the ambit of investigation into settings and
risings and turnings, and eclipses and matters related to these, makes no
further contribution to the blessedness which comes from knowledge;
but people who know about these things, if they are ignorant of what
the natures [in question] are and what the most important causes are,
have fears just the same as if they did not have this special knowledge-
and perhaps even more fears, since the wonderment which comes from
the prior consideration of these phenomena cannot discover a resolution
or the orderly management of the most important factors.
   That is why even if we discover several causes for turnings and settings
and risings and eclipses and things of this sort (as was also the case in
[the investigation] of detailed occurrences) 80. we must not believe that
our study of these matters has failed to achieve a degree of accuracy
which contributes to our undisturbed and blessed state. Consequently,
we should account for the causes of meteorological phenomena and every-
thing which is non-evident, observing in how many different ways similar
phenomena occur in our experience; and [we should] disdain those who
fail to recognize what exists or comes to be in a single manner and what
occurs in many different ways, because they overlook the [fact that the]
presentation [comes] from great distances and are, moreover, ignorant
18                                                                 /-2 to /-3

of the circumstances in which one cannot achieve freedom from distur-
bance and those, similarly, in which one can achieve freedom from dis-
turbance. So if we think that [a phenomenon] might also occur in some
particular way and recognize the very fact that it [might] happen in many
different ways, we shall be as free from disturbance as if we knew that
it occurred in some particular way.
   81. In addition to all these points in general, one must also conceive
that the worst disturbance occurs in human souls [I] because of the
opinion that these things [the heavenly phenomena] are blessed and
indestructible and that they have wishes and undertake actions and exert
causality in a manner inconsistent with those attributes, and [2] because
of the eternal expectation and suspicion that something dreadful [might
happen] such as the myths tell about, or [3] even because they fear that
very lack of sense-perception which occurs in death, as though it were
relevant to them, and [4] because they are not in this state as a result of
their opinions but because of some irrational condition; hence, not setting
a limit on their dread, they suffer a disturbance equal to or even greater
than what they would suffer if they actually held these opinions. 82. And
freedom from disturbance is a release from all of this and involves a
continuous recollection of the general and most important points [of
the system].
   Hence, one must attend to one's present feelings and sense-perceptions,
to the common sense-perceptions for common properties and to the
individual sense-perceptions for individual properties, and to every imme-
diately clear fact as revealed by each of the criteria. For, if we attend to
these things, we will give a correct and complete causal account of the
source of our disturbance and fear, and [so] dissolve them, by accounting
for the causes of meteorological and other phenomena which we are
constantly exposed to and which terrify other men most severely.
   Here, Herodotus, in summary form are the most important points
about the nature of the universe; 83. consequently, I think that this
account, if mastered with precision, would be able to make a man incom-
parably stronger than other men, even if he does not go on to all of the
precise details of individual doctrines. For he will also be able to clarify,
by his own efforts, many of the precise details of individual doctrines in
our entire system, and these points themselves, when lodged in memory,
will be a constant aid.
   For [these doctrines] are such that even those who have already worked
out the details of individual doctrines sufficiently well or even completely,
can, by analysing them into [intellectual] applications of this sort, acquire
most of the [elements of the] survey of nature as a whole. But those who
are not among the completely accomplished [students of nature] can, on
The Extant Letters                                                          19

the basis of these points and following the method which does not involve
verbal expression, with the speed of thought achieve an overview of the
doctrines most important for [achieving] tranquillity.

Letter to Pythocles: Diogenes Laertius                                    [I-3]
10.83-116
   83. Epicurus to Pythocles, greetings:
   84. Cleon delivered to me your letter, in which you continued to
display a good will to us worthy of our concern for you and tried, not
unconvincingly, to recall the lines of reasoning which contribute to a
blessed life; and you requested that I send you a brief and concise
[statement of our] reasoning concerning meteorological phenomena in
order to facilitate your recollections. For our other writings on the topic
are hard to recall, even though, as you said, you have them constantly
in hand. We were pleased to receive this request from you and were
seized by pleasant expectations. 85. Therefore, having written all the
rest, we shall produce what you requested, since these lines of reasoning
will be useful to many others too, and especially to those who have just
begun to sample true physics and those who are entangled in preoccupa-
tions more profound than some of the general studies. So grasp them
well and, holding them keenly in your memory, survey them in conjunc-
tion with the rest [of my summary of physics], which I sent to Herodotus
as the Smaller Summary.
    First of all, do not believe that there is any other goal to be achieved
by the knowledge of meteorological phenomena, whether they are dis-
cussed in conjunction with [physics in general] or on their own, than
freedom from disturbance and a secure conviction, just as with the rest
[of physics]. 86. [Our aim is] neither to achieve the impossible, even by
force, nor to maintain a theory which is in all respects similar either to
our discussions on the ways oflife or to our clarifications of other questions
in physics, such as the thesis that the totality [of things] consists of bodies
and intangible nature, and that the elements are atomic, and all such
things as are consistent with the phenomena in only one way. This is
not the case with meteorological phenomena, but rather these phenomena
admit of several different explanations for their coming to be and several
different accounts of their existence which are consistent with our
sense-perceptions.
    For we should not do physics by following groundless postulates and
stipulations, but in the manner called for by the phenomena; 87. for our
life does not now need irrationality and groundless opinion, but rather
for us to live without tumult. And everything happens smoothly and
20                                                                        /-3

(providing everything is clarified by the method of several different
explanations) consistently with the phenomena, when one accepts appro-
priately what is plausibly said about them. But when one accepts one
theory and rejects another which is equally consistent with the phenome-
non in question, it is clear that one has thereby blundered out of any
sort of proper physics and fallen into mythology. Some of the phenomena
which are within our [experience] and are observed just as they really
are do provide signs applicable to what comes to pass in meteorology,
but we cannot observe meteorological phenomena; for they can occur in
several different ways. 88. We must, however, observe the appearance
of each thing and, with regard to the things connected with it, we must
distinguish those whose coming to pass in several different ways is not
testified against by what happens within our experience.
   A cosmos is a circumscribed portion of the heavens which contains
stars and an earth and all the phenomena, whose dissolution will involve
the destruction of everything within it; it is separated off from the
unlimited and terminates at a boundary which is either rare or dense; it
is either revolving or stationary; it has an outline which is either round
or triangular, or some shape or other. For all of these are possibilities. For
none of the phenomena in this cosmos testifies against [these possibilities],
since here it is not possible to grasp a limit [of our cosmos].
   89. It is possible to grasp that there is an unlimited number of such
cosmoi; and that such a cosmos can come into existence both within
a[nother] cosmos and in an intercosmos, which is what we call the interval
between cosmoi, in a place containing much void and not in an extensive
area which is completely void, as some people say; [this happens] when
certain seeds of the right sort rush in from one cosmos or intercosmos-
or even from several-[thereby] gradually causing conjunctions and artic-
ulations and movements to another place (if it so happen) and influxes
from [atoms] which are in the right condition, until [the cosmos] is
completed and achieves stability, [i.e.,] for as long as the foundations
laid can accept additional material. 90. For one does not need just to
have an aggregate come into being, or a rotation in the void in which a
cosmos comes to be by necessity, as opinion holds, and [then] grows
until it collides with another [cosmos], as one of the so-called physicists
says. For this is in conflict with the phenomena.
   The sun and the moon and the other heavenly bodies did not come
into being on their own and then get included by the cosmos, but they
immediately began to take shape and grow (and similarly for the earth
and sea) by means of infusions and rotations of certain natures with fine
parts, either breath-like or fiery or both. For sense-perception suggests
that they [come into being] thus.
The Extant Letters                                                                       21

   91. The size of the sun and the other heavenly bodies relative to us
is just as big as it appears. 13 But relative to itself it is either bigger or a
bit smaller than it is seen as being, or just the same size. 14 For in our
experience too fire-signals, when seen from a distance, are observed in
this way by our sense-perception. And every objection directed at this
portion [of our theory] will be easily dissolved if only one pays attention
to the clear facts, which we set out in our book On Nature. 92. The
risings and settings of the sun and the moon and the other heavenly bodies
could occur by kindling and extinguishing, as long as the circumstances in
both locales [i.e., east and west] are such as to produce the aforementioned
events; for none of the appearances testifies against this. <And> they could
also be produced by the appearance [of these bodies] above the earth and
a subsequent blocking [by it]; for none of the appearances testifies against
this either. And it is not impossible that their motions come to pass
because of the rotation of the entire cosmos, or by its rest and their
rotation, produced by the necessity generated when they [first] rose, at
the beginning when the cosmos was [first] coming into being. [There is
probably a lacuna in the text here.] 93 .... by extreme heat produced
by a certain kind of distribution of the fire which constantly impinges
on the adjoining places.
   The turnings of the sun and moon could come to pass because of the
obliquity of the heaven, which is compelled in this way at [certain] times;
similarly, it could also be because of the resistance in the air, or because
the fuel which regularly fits their requirements is burned up or is insuffi-
cient in quantity; or even because these heavenly bodies had forced on
them from the very beginning the sort of rotation which causes them to
have a kind of spiral motion. For all such possibilities and those like
them are in no way inconsistent with any of the clear facts, providing
one always in such detailed enquiries keeps a firm hold on what is possible
and can refer each of them to what is consistent with the phenomena,
not fearing the slavish technicalities of the astronomers.
   94. The waning of the moon and its subsequent waxing could come
to pass by means of the turning of this body and just as well by means
of the changing shapes of the air, and again, also because of the interposi-
tion [of other bodies], and in all the ways which the phenomena in our
experience suggest for the explanation of this kind of thing-as long as
one is not so enamoured of the method of unique explanations as to

13. Scholiast: "This is also in book 11 of the On Nature; for, he says, if its size had been
reduced because of the distance, its brightness would have been even more reduced; for
there is no other distance more symmetrical with this [degree of brightness]."
14. Scholiast: "But not at the same time."
22                                                                                   /-3

groundlessly reject the others, because of a failure to understand what
it is possible for a man to understand and what is not, for this reason
desiring to understand what cannot be understood. And again, it is
possible that the moon produces its own light, and also possible that it
receives it from the sun. 95. For in our own experience we see many
things which produce their own light, and many which receive it from
other things. And none of the meteorological phenomena is a hindrance
[to these possibilities], as long as one always remembers the method of
several different explanations, considers together the hypotheses and
explanations compatible with these, and does not, by looking to things
which are not compatible, give them a pointless importance and so slide,
in different ways on different occasions, into the method of unique
explanations. And the appearance of a face in [the moon] could occur
because of the variation among its parts, and because [some parts] are
blocked, and by all the methods one might consider which are consistent
with the phenomena. 96. For in the case of all the meteorological phenom-
ena one must not give up tracking down such [possibilities]. For if one
is in conflict with the clear facts, one will never be able to partake of
genuine freedom from disturbance.
   The eclipse of the sun and the moon could also come to pass by
extinguishing, as is also observed to occur in our experience; and also
by being blocked by certain other bodies, either the earth or the heavens
or some other such thing. And one should in this way consider the
methods [of explanation] which are consistent with each other, and that
it is not impossible that some of them may occur together. 15
   97. And again, we should grasp the orderliness of the cyclical periods
[of the heavenly bodies] [as happening] in the same way that some of
the things which also happen in our experience [occur]; and let the nature
of the divine not be brought to bear on this at all, but let it go on being
thought of as free from burdensome service and as [living] in complete
blessedness. For if this is not done, the entire study of the explanations
for meteorological phenomena will be pointless, as it has already been
for some who did not pursue the method of possible explanations and
so were reduced to pointlessness because they thought that [the phenom-
ena] only occurred in one manner and rejected all the other explanations
which were also possible, and so were swept off into an unintelligible


15. Scholiast: "He says the same in book 12 of On Nature, and in addition that the sun is
eclipsed by the fact that the moon darkens it, and the moon by the shadow of the earth,
but also by its own retreat. This is also said by Diogenes the Epicurean in book 1 of
his Selections."
The Extant Letters                                                          23

position and were unable to consider together the phenomena which one
must accept as signs.
   98. The varying lengths of nights and days [could occur] as a result
of the alternate swift and slow motions of the sun over the earth, <or
even> as a result of covering the varying distances between places and
certain places either faster or slower, as is also observed [to happen] with
some things in our experience; and we must speak in a manner consistent
with these when we speak of meteorological phenomena. But those who
accept one explanation are in conflict with the phenomena and have lost
track of what it is possible for a man to understand.
   Predictive weather signs could occur as a result of coincidental conjunc-
tions of events, as in the case of animals which are evident in our experi-
ence, and also as a result of alterations and changes in the air. For both
of these are not in conflict with the phenomena; 99. but it is not possible
to see in what sort of cases the explanation is given by reference to this
or that cause.
   Clouds could come to be and to be formed both as a result of thickenings
of air caused by the pressure of the winds, and as a result of the entangle-
ments of atoms which grip one another and are suitable for producing
this effect, and as a result of a collection of effluences from both earth
and bodies of water; and it is not impossible that the formation of such
compounds is also produced in several other ways. So rains [lit. waters]
could be produced from the clouds, sometimes when they are compressed
and sometimes when they undergo change; 100. and again, winds, by
their egress from suitable places and motion through the air, [can cause
rain] when there is a relatively forceful influx from certain aggregates
which are suitable for such discharges.
   Thunder can occur as a result of the confinement of wind in the
hollows of the clouds, as happens in closed vessels [in] our [experience],
and as a result of the booming of fire combined with wind inside the
clouds, and as a result of the rupture and separation of clouds, and by
the friction between clouds and their fragmentation when they have taken
on an ice-like solidity. And the phenomena invite us to say that the entire
topic as well as this part of it are subject to several different explanations.
   101. And lightning flashes similarly occur in several different ways;
for the [atomic] configuration which produces fire is squeezed out by the
friction and collision of clouds and so generates a lightning flash; [it
could] also [occur] as a result of the wind making the sort of bodies
which cause this luminiscence flash forth from the clouds; and by the
squeezing of clouds when they are compressed, either by each other or
by the winds; and by the inclusion [in them] of the light scattered from
24                                                                                     /-3

the heavenly bodies, which is then driven together by the motion of the
clouds and winds and is expelled by the clouds; or as a result of the
filtering of the finest form of light through the clouds 16 and as a result
of its movement; and by the conflagration of the wind which occurs
because of the vigour of its movement and its extreme compression; 102.
and because the clouds are broken by the winds and the atoms which
produce fire are then expelled and so produce the presentation of the
lightning flash. And it will be easy to see [that it could happen] in a great
many other ways, for him who clings always to the phenomena and who
is able to contemplate together what is similar to the phenomena.
    The lightning flash precedes the thunder in this sort of arrangement
of clouds because the configuration which produces the lightning flash
is expelled at the same time as the wind strikes [the cloud] and subse-
quently the wind, being confined, produces this booming noise; and
because although both strike together, the lightning flash moves with a
more vigorous speed towards us, 103. while the thunder comes later, just
as happens with some things which strike blows and are observed from
a distance.
    Thunder bolts can occur as a result of repeated gatherings of winds,
and their compression and powerful conflagration, and the fracture of
one part and its very powerful expulsion towards the areas below, the
breakage occurring because the places adjacent to it are more dense owing
to the thickening of the clouds; and [it may occur] just as thunder too
can occur, simply because of the expulsion of the fire, when a great deal
of it is confined and very powerfully struck by the wind and has broken
the cloud because it cannot escape to the adjacent areas since they are
always compacting together. 17 104. And thunderbolts can be produced
in several different ways-just be sure that myths are kept out of it! And
they will be kept out of it if one follows rightly the appearances and
takes them as signs of what is unobservable.
    Whirlwinds can occur as a result of a cloud being forced in the form
of a column downwards to regions below, being pushed by a mass of
wind and driven by the power of the wind, while at the same time the
wind outside pushes the cloud to one side; and by the formation of the
wind into a circle when some air presses down on it from above; and as
a result of the compacting of the air around it, when a great flow of
winds takes place and is not able to flow off to the side. 105. And when
the whirlwind is forced down to the earth, tornadoes are produced, in

16. Scholiast: "Or clouds were incinerated by the fire and the thunder is produced."
17. Scholiast: "It generally [strikes] on a high mountain, on which thunderbolts most
often fall."
The Extant Letters                                                       25

whatever way their production might take place owing to the movement
of the wind; and when it [is forced down] on the sea, waterspouts are pro-
duced.
   It is possible that earthquakes occur as a result of the enclosure of
wind in the earth and the juxtaposition of small masses [of wind?] with
the earth and its constant movement, all of which produce the shaking
in the earth. And [the earth] either takes this wind into itself from the
outside or because solid blocks of earth fall inwards into cavernous places
in the earth and turn the enclosed air into wind. <And> earthquakes may
also be produced as a result of the mere transmission of the movement
produced by the falling of many solid blocks of earth and the transmission
[of this shock] back again when it collides with some more densely
compressed parts of the earth. 106. And these movements of the earth
may also occur in many other ways. [There may be a lacuna in our
text here.]
   And the winds happen to occur from time to time when on any occasion
some foreign matter gradually enters in, and as a result of the collection
of a tremendous amount of water; and the rest of the winds occur when
even just a few fall into the many hollow spaces, if there occurs a
transmission of their force.
   Hail is produced by a quite powerful solidification, [a result of] a
circular movement and [subsequent] division of certain breathlike parti-
cles; and also <because of> a more moderate solidification of certain watery
particles <and> their simultaneous fracture, which at the same time con-
denses them and breaks them up, so that the solidified material forms
compounds both within the distinct parts and in the aggregation. 107.
It is not impossible that their circular shape is produced both because
the extremities on all sides melt off and because, at the formation of the
compound, [particles] (either watery or breathlike) surround it evenly,
part by part on all sides, as is said.
   Snow could be produced by the outpouring of fine [drops of] water
from the clouds owing to the symmetry of the pores and to the constant
and powerful friction on the right sort of clouds by the wind, followed
by the solidification of this [water] during its movement as a result of
some powerful conditions of coldness in the lower regions of the clouds.
And as a result of a solidification in the clouds which have a uniform
rareness this sort of outflow can also occur when the watery clouds rub
against each other and lie side by side; and these cause a kind of compres-
sion and so produce hail-something which happens mostly in the spring.
108. And this aggregation of snow could also vibrate off when the clouds
which have undergone solidification rub against each other. And it is
also possible that snow is produced in other ways.
26                                                                       /-3

   Dew is produced by the assembling from the air of [particles] which
become productive of this sort of moisture; and also by an exhalation
either from wet areas or areas which have bodies of water (which is the
sort of place where dew is most likely to be produced) followed by their
assembling in the same place and their production of moisture and finally
by its movement to lower regions, exactly as certain such things in our
own experience <are observed being produced. And frost> 109. is produced
<no differently> from dew, when certain such things are solidified in a
certain way because of a certain condition of cold air.
   Ice is produced both by the expulsion of the round configuration from
the water and by the compression of the scalene and acute-angled [particles]
which exist in the water; and also by the addition from the outside of such
[particles], which are driven together and so produce solidification in the
water by expelling a certain number of round [particles].
   The rainbow occurs as a result of the sun shining on water-laden air;
or as a result of some peculiar coalescence of light and air which will
produce the peculiar properties of these colours, either all [together] or
one type at a time; and again, as a result of the reflection of this light
the neighbouring regions of the air will take on the sort of coloration
which we see because the sun shines on its parts. 110. This presentation
of roundness occurs because the vision observes the distance as [being]
equal from all directions, or [possibly] because the atoms in the air (or
those in the clouds which are derived from the same air) are compressed
in such a way that this compound gives off[the appearance of] roundness.
   The halo around the moon is produced because air from all sides
moves towards the moon; or when it evenly restricts [the movement of]
the effluences sent off from it to such an extent that this cloudlike
phenomenon forms around it in a circle and is not interrupted in the
slightest extent; or it restricts [the movement of] the air around it symmet-
rically on all sides so that what is around it takes on a round and dense
formation. 111. And this happens in certain parts either because a certain
effluence forces its way in from outside or because heat occupies passages
suitable for the production of this effect.
   Comets occur when, under suitable circumstances, fire is collected in
certain places in the meteorological region at certain intervals of time;
or when from time to time the heavens above us adopt a particular kind
of movement, so that such heavenly bodies make their appearance; or
the [comets] just rush in by themselves at certain times because of some
circumstances and approach the regions where we happen to be and
become prominently visible; and they disappear owing to opposite causes.
112. Certain heavenly bodies rotate in place [i.e., those near the pole,
which never set], which occurs not only because that part of the cosmos
The Extant Letters                                                       27

around which the rest rotates is stationary, as some people say, but also
because there is a circular rotation of air around it which prevents them
from wandering around, as the other heavenly bodies do; or also because
they do not have any appropriate fuel in adjacent regions, while there is
[a supply of fuel] in the area where they are observed. And this [phenome-
non] could also be produced in several other ways, provided one can
reason out what is consistent with the appearances.
   The wandering of some of the heavenly bodies, if they really do happen
to have this kind of movement, 113. and the regular motion of others
could be a result of them starting out with circular movement and [then]
having been forced in such a way that some of them move in the same
uniform rotation while others move with a rotation which at the same
time has certain irregularities; and it could also be that, according to the
regions over which they move, in one place there are uniform regions
of air which push them on continuously in the same direction and which
burn uniformly, while elsewhere there are irregular [regions of air] of
such a nature that the observed differences are produced. But to supply
one cause for these facts, when the phenomena suggest that there are
several different explanations, is the lunatic and inappropriate behaviour
of those who are obsessed with a pointless [brand of] astronomy and of
certain [others] who supply vain explanations, since they do not in any
way liberate the divine nature from burdensome service. 114. That some
heavenly bodies are observed being left behind by others occurs because
although they move around in the same orbit they do so more slowly;
and because they also move in the opposite direction being drawn back-
wards by the same rotation; and also because some rotate through a larger
area and some through a smaller, though they turn with the same rotation.
But to pronounce unqualifiedly on these matters is appropriate to those
who wish [only] to make a display of wonders for the masses.
   So-called falling stars could be produced in part by their own friction,
and also because they fall wherever there is a massive outburst of wind,
just as we said [occurred] in the case of lightning flashes; 115. also by a
collection of atoms capable of producing fire, when similar material
[congregates] to produce this result and also a motion where the surge
produced by the original collection occurs; and also because wind is
concentrated in certain dense and misty places and this ignites as a result
of its confinement, then breaks through the surrounding environment
and is borne to the place to which the movement makes its surge; and
there are other non-mythical ways in which this phenomenon could
be produced.
   The predictive weather signs which occur in certain animals occur by
a coincidental conjunction of events; for the animals do not bring any
28                                                                   /-3 to 1-4

necessity to bear on the production of winter, nor does any divine nature
sit around waiting for these animals to come out [of hibernation] and
[only] then fulfils these signs. 116. For such foolishness would not afflict
any ordinary animal, even if it were a little more sophisticated, let alone
one who possessed complete happiness.
   Commit all of this to memory, Pythocles; for you will leave myth far
behind you and will be able to see [the causes of phenomena] similar to
these. Most important, devote yourself to the contemplation of the basic
principles [i.e., atoms] and the unlimited [i.e., void] and things related
to them, and again [the contemplation] of the criteria and the feelings
and the [goal] for sake of which we reason these things out. For if these
things above all are contemplated together, they will make it easy for
you to see the explanations of the detailed phenomena. For those who
have not accepted these [ideas] with complete contentment could not do
a good job of contemplating these things themselves, nor could they
acquire the [goal] for the sake of which these things should be contem-
plated.

Letter to Menoeceus: Diogenes Laertius                                    [1-4]
10.121-135
    121. Epicurus to Menoeceus, greetings:
    122. Let no one delay the study of philosophy while young nor weary
of it when old. For no one is either too young or too old for the health
of the soul. He who says either that the time for philosophy has not yet
come or that it has passed is like someone who says that the time for
happiness has not yet come or that it has passed. Therefore, both young
and old must philosophize, the latter so that although old he may stay
young in good things owing to gratitude for what has occurred, the
former so that although young he too may be like an old man owing to
his lack of fear of what is to come. Therefore, one must practise the things
which produce happiness, since if that is present we have everything and
if it is absent we do everything in order to have it.
    123. Do and practise what I constantly told you to do, believing these
to be the elements of living well. First, believe that god is an indestructible
and blessed animal, in accordance with the general conception of god
commonly held, and do not ascribe to god anything foreign to his inde-
structibility or repugnant to his blessedness. Believe of him everything
which is able to preserve his blessedness and indestructibility. For gods
do exist, since we have clear knowledge of them. But they are not such
as the many believe them to be. For they do not adhere to their own
The Extant Letters                                                       29
views about the gods. The man who denies the gods of the many is not
impious, but rather he who ascribes to the gods the opinions of the many.
124. For the pronouncements of the many about the gods are not basic
grasps but false suppositions. Hence come the greatest harm from the
gods to bad men and the greatest benefits [to the good]. For the gods
always welcome men who are like themselves, being congenial to their
own virtues and considering that whatever is not such is uncongenial.
   Get used to believing that death is nothing to us. For all good and
bad consists in sense-experience, and death is the privation of sense-
experience. Hence, a correct knowledge of the fact that death is nothing
to us makes the mortality of life a matter for contentment, not by adding
a limitless time [to life] but by removing the longing for immortality.
125. For there is nothing fearful in life for one who has grasped that
there is nothing fearful in the absence of life. Thus, he is a fool who
says that he fears death not because it will be painful when present but
because it is painful when it is still to come. For that which while present
causes no distress causes unnecessary pain when merely anticipated. So
death, the most frightening of bad things, is nothing to us; since when
we exist, death is not yet present, and when death is present, then we
do not exist. Therefore, it is relevant neither to the living nor to the
dead, since it does not affect the former, and the latter do not exist. But
the many sometimes flee death as the greatest of bad things and sometimes
choose it as a relief from the bad things in life. 126. But the wise man
neither rejects life nor fears death. For living does not offend him, nor
does he believe not living to be something bad. And just as he does not
unconditionally choose the largest amount of food but the most pleasant
food, so he savours not the longest time but the most pleasant. He who
advises the young man to live well and the old man to die well is simple-
minded, not just because of the pleasing aspects of life but because the
same kind of practice produces a good life and a good death. Much worse
is he who says that it is good not to be born, "but when born to pass
through the gates ofHades as quickly as possible." 18 127. For if he really
believes what he says, why doesn't he leave life? For it is easy for him
to do, if he has firmly decided on it. But if he is joking, he is wasting
his time among men who don't welcome it. We must remember that
what will happen is neither unconditionally within our power nor uncon-
ditionally outside our power, so that we will not unconditionally expect
that it will occur nor despair of it as unconditionally not going to occur.
   One must reckon that of desires some are natural, some groundless;

18. Theognis 425, 427.
30                                                                      1-4

and of the natural desires some are necessary and some merely natural;
and of the necessary, some are necessary for happiness and some for
freeing the body from troubles and some for life itself. 128. The unwaver-
ing contemplation of these enables one to refer every choice and avoidance
to the health of the body and the freedom of the soul from disturbance,
since this is the goal of a blessed life. For we do everything for the sake
of being neither in pain nor in terror. As soon as we achieve this state
every storm in the soul is dispelled, since the animal is not in a position
to go after some need nor to seek something else to complete the good
of the body and the soul. For we are in need of pleasure only when we
are in pain because of the absence of pleasure, and when we are not in
pain, then we no longer need pleasure.
   And this is why we say that pleasure is the starting-point and goal of
living blessedly. 129. For we recognized this as our first innate good,
and this is our starting point for every choice and avoidance and we
come to this by judging every good by the criterion of feeling. And it is
just because this is the first innate good that we do not choose every
pleasure; but sometimes we pass up many pleasures when we get a larger
amount of what is uncongenial from them. And we believe many pains
to be better than pleasures when a greater pleasure follows for a long
while if we endure the pains. So every pleasure is a good thing, since it
has a nature congenial [to us], but not every one is to be chosen. Just as
every pain too is a bad thing, but not every one is such as to be always
avoided. 130. It is, however, appropriate to make all these decisions by
comparative measurement and an examination of the advantages and
disadvantages. For at some times we treat the good thing as bad and,
conversely, the bad thing as good.
   And we believe that self-sufficiency is a great good, not in order that
we might make do with few things under all circumstances, but so that
if we do not have a lot we can make do with few, being genuinely
convinced that those who least need extravagance enjoy it most; and that
everything natural is easy to obtain and whatever is groundless is hard
to obtain; and that simple flavours provide a pleasure equal to that of an
extravagant life-style when all pain from want is removed, 131. and barley
cakes and water provide the highest pleasure when someone in want
takes them. Therefore, becoming accustomed to simple, not extravagant,
ways of life makes one completely healthy, makes man unhesitant in the
face of life's necessary duties, puts us in a better condition for the times
of extravagance which occasionally come along, and makes us fearless in
the face of chance. So when we say that pleasure is the goal we do not
mean the pleasures of the profligate or the pleasures of consumption, as
The Extant Letters                                                          31

some believe, either from ignorance and disagreement or from deliberate
misinterpretation, but rather the lack of pain in the body and disturbance
in the soul. 132. For it is not drinking bouts and continuous partying
and enjoying boys and women, or consuming fish and the other dainties of
an extravagant table, which produce the pleasant life, but sober calculation
which searches out the reasons for every choice and avoidance and drives
out the opinions which are the source of the greatest turmoil for
men's souls.
   Prudence is the principle of all these things and is the greatest good.
That is why prudence is a more valuable thing than philosophy. For
prudence is the source of all the other virtues, teaching that it is impossible
to live pleasantly without living prudently, honourably, and justly, and
impossible to live prudently, honourably, and justly without living pleas-
antly. For the virtues are natural adjuncts of the pleasant life and the
pleasant life is inseparable from them.
   133. For who do you believe is better than a man who has pious
opinions about the gods, is always fearless about death, has reasoned out
the natural goal of life and understands that the limit of good things is
easy to achieve completely and easy to provide, and that the limit of bad
things either has a short duration or causes little trouble?
   As to [Fate], introduced by some as the mistress of all, <he is scornful,
saying rather that some things happen of necessity,> others by chance,
and others by our own agency, and that he sees that necessity is not
answerable [to anyone], that chance is unstable, while what occurs by
our own agency is autonomous, and that it is to this that praise and
blame are attached. 134. For it would be better to follow the stories told
about the gods than to be a slave to the fate of the natural philosophers.
For the former suggests a hope of escaping bad things by honouring the
gods, but the latter involves an inescapable and merciless necessity. And
he [the wise man] believes that chance is not a god, as the many think,
for nothing is done in a disorderly way by god; nor that it is an uncertain
cause. For he does not think that anything good or bad with respect to
living blessedly is given by chance to men, although it does provide the
starting points of great good and bad things. And he thinks it better to
be unlucky in a rational way than lucky in a senseless way; 135. for it is
better for a good decision not to turn out right in action than for a bad
decision to turn out right because of chance.
   Practise these and the related precepts day and night, by yourself and
with a like-minded friend, and you will never be disturbed either when
awake or in sleep, and you will live as a god among men. For a man who
lives among immortal goods is in no respect like a mere mortal animal.
32                                                                                      /-5


Ancient Collections of Maxims
The Principal Doctrines: Diogenes Laertius                                            [I-5]
10.139-154
   I What is blessed and indestructible has no troubles itself, nor does it
give trouble to anyone else, so that it is not affected by feelings of anger
or gratitude. For all such things are a sign of weakness. 19
   II Death is nothing to us. For what has been dissolved has no sense-
experience, and what has no sense-experience is nothing to us.
   III The removal of all feeling of pain is the limit of the magnitude of
pleasures. Wherever a pleasurable feeling is present, for as long as it is
present, there is neither a feeling of pain nor a feeling of distress, nor
both together.
   IV The feeling of pain does not linger continuously in the flesh; rather,
the sharpest is present for the shortest time, while what merely exceeds
the feeling of pleasure in the flesh lasts only a few days. And diseases
which last a long time involve feelings of pleasure which exceed feelings
of pain.
   V It is impossible to live pleasantly without living prudently, honoura-
bly, and justly and impossible to live prudently, honourably, and justly
without living pleasantly. And whoever lacks this cannot live pleasantly.
   VI The natural good of public office and kingship is for the sake of
getting confidence from [other] men, [at least] from those from whom
one is able to provide this.
   VII Some men want to become famous and respected, believing that
this is the way to acquire security against [other] men. Thus if the life
of such men is secure, they acquire the natural good; but if it is not
secure, they do not have that for the sake of which they strove from the
beginning according to what is naturally congenial.
   VIII No pleasure is a bad thing in itself. But the things which produce
certain pleasures bring troubles many times greater than the pleasures.
   IX If every pleasure were condensed and were present, both in time
and in the whole compound [body and soul] or in the most important
parts of our nature, then pleasures would never differ from one another.
   X If the things which produce the pleasures of profligate men dissolved
the intellect's fears about the phenomena of the heavens and about death

19. Scholiast: "Elsewhere he says that the gods are contemplated by reason, and that some
exist 'numerically' [i.e., are numerically distinct, each being unique in kind] while others
are similar in form, because of a continuous flow of similar images to the same place; and
that they are anthropomorphic."
Ancient Collections of Maxims                                           33

and pains and, moreover, if they taught us the limit of our desires, then
we would not have reason to criticize them, since they would be filled
with pleasures from every source and would contain no feeling of pain
or distress from any source-and that is what is bad.
   XI If our suspicions about heavenly phenomena and about death did
not trouble us at all and were never anything to us, and, moreover, if
not knowing the limits of pains and desires did not trouble us, then we
would have no need of natural science.
   XII It is impossible for someone ignorant about the nature of the
universe but still suspicious about the subjects of the myths to dissolve
his feelings of fear about the most important matters. So it is impossible
to receive unmixed pleasures without knowing natural science.
   XIII It is useless to obtain security from men while the things above
and below the earth and, generally, the things in the unbounded remained
as objects of suspicion.
   XIV The purest security is that which comes from a quiet life and
withdrawal from the many, although a certain degree of security from
other men does come by means of the power to repel [attacks] and by
means of prosperity.
   XV Natural wealth is both limited and easy to acquire. But wealth [as
defined by] groundless opinions extends without limit.
   XVI Chance has a small impact on the wise man, while reasoning has
arranged for, is arranging for, and will arrange for the greatest and most
important matters throughout the whole of his life.
   XVII The just life is most free from disturbance, but the unjust life
is full of the greatest disturbance.
   XVIII As soon as the feeling of pain produced by want is removed,
pleasure in the flesh will not increase but is only varied. But the limit
of mental pleasures is produced by a reasoning out of these very pleasures
[of the flesh] and of the things related to these, which used to cause the
greatest fears in the intellect.
   XIX Unlimited time and limited time contain equal [amounts of]
pleasure, if one measures its limits by reasoning.
   XX The flesh took the limits of pleasure to be unlimited, and [only]
an unlimited time would have provided it. But the intellect, reasoning
out the goal and limit of the flesh and dissolving the fears of eternity,
provided us with the perfect way of life and had no further need of
unlimited time. But it [the intellect] did not flee pleasure, and even when
circumstances caused an exit from life it did not die as though it were
lacking any aspect of the best life.
   XXI He who has learned the limits of life knows that it is easy to
provide that which removes the feeling of pain owing to want and make
34                                                                                    /-5

one's whole life perfect. So there is no need for things which involve
struggle.
   XXII One must reason about the real goal and every clear fact, to
which we refer mere opinions. If not, everything will be full of indecision
and disturbance.
   XXIII If you quarrel with all your sense-perceptions you will have
nothing to refer to in judging even those sense-perceptions which you
claim are false.
   XXIV If you reject unqualifiedly any sense-perception and do not
distinguish the opinion about what awaits confirmation, and what is
already present in the sense-perception, and the feelings, and every appli-
cation of the intellect to presentations, you will also disturb the rest of
your sense-perceptions with your pointless opinion; as a result you will
reject every criterion. If, on the other hand, in your conceptions formed
by opinion, you affirm everything that awaits confirmation as well as
what does not, you will not avoid falsehood, so that you will be in the
position of maintaining every disputable point in every decision about
what is and is not correct.
   XXV If you do not, on every occasion, refer each of your actions to
the goal of nature, but instead turn prematurely to some other [criterion]
in avoiding or pursuing [things], your actions will not be consistent with
your reasoning.
   XXVI The desires which do not bring a feeling of pain when not
fulfilled are not necessary; but the desire for them is easy to dispel when
they seem to be hard to achieve or to produce harm.
   XXVII Of the things which wisdom provides for the blessedness of
one's whole life, by far the greatest is the possession of friendship.
   XXVIII The same understanding produces confidence about there
being nothing terrible which is eternal or [even] long-lasting and has also
realized that security amid even these limited [bad things] is most easily
achieved through friendship.
   XXIX Of desires, some are natural and necessary, some natural and
not necessary, and some neither natural nor necessary but occurring as
a result of a groundless opinion. 20
   XXX Among natural desires, those which do not lead to a feeling of
pain if not fulfilled and about which there is an intense effort, these are


20. Scholiast: "Epicurus thinks that those which liberate us from pains are natural and
necessary, for example drinking in the case of thirst; natural and not necessary are those
which merely provide variations of pleasure but do not remove the feeling of pain, for
example expensive foods; neither natural nor necessary are, for example, crowns and the
erection of statues."
Ancient Collections of Maxims                                             35

produced by a groundless opinion and they fail to be dissolved not because
of their own nature but because of the groundless opinions of mankind.
   XXXI The justice of nature is a pledge of reciprocal usefulness, [i.e.,]
neither to harm one another nor be harmed.
   XXXII There was no justice or injustice with respect to all those
animals which were unable to make pacts about neither harming one
another nor being harmed. Similarly, [there was no justice or injustice]
for all those nations which were unable or unwilling to make pacts about
neither harming one another nor being harmed.
   XXXIII Justice was not a thing in its own right, but [exists] in mutual
dealings in whatever places there [is] a pact about neither harming one
another nor being harmed.
   XXXIV Injustice is not a bad thing in its own right, but [only] because
of the fear produced by the suspicion that one will not escape the notice
of those assigned to punish such actions.
   XXXV It is impossible for someone who secretly does something
which men agreed [not to do] in order to avoid harming one another or
being harmed to be confident that he will escape detection, even if
in current circumstances he escapes detection ten thousand times. For
until his death it will be uncertain whether he will continue to escape de-
tection.
   XXXVI In general outline justice is the same for everyone; for it
was something useful in mutual associations. But with respect to the
peculiarities of a region or of other [relevant] causes, it does not follow
that the same thing is just for everyone.
   XXXVII Of actions believed to be just, that whose usefulness in
circumstances of mutual associations is supported by the testimony [of
experience] has the attribute of serving as just whether it is the same for
everyone or not. And if someone passes a law and it does not turn out
to be in accord with what is useful in mutual associations, this no longer
possesses the nature of justice. And if what is useful in the sense of being
just changes, but for a while fits our basic grasp [of justice], nevertheless
it was just for that length of time, [at least] for those who do not disturb
themselves with empty words but simply look to the facts.
   XXXVIII If objective circumstances have not changed and things
believed to be just have been shown in actual practice not to be in accord
with our basic grasp [of justice], then those things were not just. And if
objective circumstances do change and the same things which had been
just turn out to be no longer useful, then those things were just as long
as they were useful for the mutual associations of fellow citizens; but
later, when they were not useful, they were no longer just.
   XXXIX The man who has made the best arrangements for confidence
36                                                                               /-5 to /-6

about external threats is he who has made the manageable things akin
to himself, and has at least made the unmanageable things not alien to
himself. But he avoided all contact with things for which not even this
could be managed and he drove out of his life everything which it profited
him to drive out.
   XL All those who had the power to acquire the greatest confidence
from [the threats posed by] their neighbours also thereby lived together
most pleasantly with the surest guarantee; and since they enjoyed the
fullest sense of belonging they did not grieve the early death of the
departed, as though it called for pity.


The Vatican Collection of Epicurean SayingSZ'                                          [1-6]

   4. Every pain is easy to despise. For [pains] which produce great
distress are short in duration; and those which last for a long time in the
flesh cause only mild distress.
   7. It is hard to commit injustice and escape detection, but to be
confident of escaping detection is impossible.
   9. Necessity is a bad thing, but there is no necessity to live with ne-
cessity.
   11. In most men, what is at peace is numbed and what is active is
raging madly.
   14. We are born only once, and we cannot be born twice; and one
must for all eternity exist no more. You are not in control of tomorrow
and yet you delay your [opportunity to] rejoice. Life is ruined by delay
and each and every one of us dies without enjoying leisure.
   15. We value our characters as our own personal possessions, whether
they are good and envied by men or not. We must regard our neighbours'
characters thus too, if they are respectable.
   16. No one who sees what is bad chooses it, but being lured [by it]
as being good compared to what is even worse than it he is caught in
the snare.
   17. It is not the young man who is to be congratulated for his blessed-
ness, but the old man who has lived well. For the young man at the full
peak of his powers wanders senselessly, owing to chance. But the old
man has let down anchor in old age as though in a harbour, since he has


21. Some of the maxims in this collection are identical to some Principal Doctrines; some
are attributed to Epicurus' followers rather than to the master himself. The Sayings selected
by Arrighetti (in Epicuro: Opere) are translated here and his text is used.
Ancient Collections of Maxims                                                        37

secured the goods about which he was previously not confident by means
of his secure sense of gratitude.
   18. If you take away the chance to see and talk and spend time with
[the beloved], then the passion of sexual love is dissolved.
   19. He who forgets the good which he previously had, has today
become an old man.
   21. One must not force nature but persuade her. And we will persuade
her by fulfilling the necessary desires, and the natural ones too if they
do not harm [us], but sharply rejecting the harmful ones.
   23. Every friendship is worth choosing22for its own sake, though it
takes its origin from the benefits [it confers on us].
   24. Dreams have neither a divine nature, nor prophetic power, but
they are produced by the impact of images.
   25. Poverty, if measured by the goal of nature, is great wealth; and
wealth, if limits are not set for it, is great poverty.
   26. One must grasp clearly that both long and short discourses contrib-
ute to the same [end].
   27. In other activities, the rewards come only when people have be-
come, with great difficulty, complete [masters of the activity]; but in
philosophy the pleasure accompanies the knowledge. For the enjoyment
does not come after the learning but the learning and the enjoyment
are simultaneous.
   28. One must not approve of those who are excessively eager for
friendship, nor those who are reluctant. But one must be willing to run
some risks for the sake of friendship.
   29. Employing frankness in my study of natural philosophy, I would
prefer to proclaim in oracular fashion what is beneficial to men, even if
no one is going to understand, rather than to assent to [common] opinions
and so enjoy the constant praise which comes from the many.
   31. (= Metrodorus fr. 51) One can attain security against other things,
but when it comes to death all men live in a city without walls.
   32. To show reverence for a wise man is itself a great good for him
who reveres [the wise man].
   33. The cry of the flesh: not to be hungry, not to be thirsty, not to
be cold. For if someone has these things and is confident of having them
in the future, he might contend even with <Zeus> for happiness.
   34. We do not need utility from our friends so much as we need
confidence concerning that utility.

22. This is an emendation for the mss' 'a virtue'; we regard the emendation as virtually
certain, though the transmitted text has been defended.
38                                                                     /-6

   35. One should not spoil what is present by desiring what is absent,
but rather reason out that these things too [i.e., what we have] were
among those we might have prayed for.
   37. Nature is weak in the face of the bad, not the good; for it is
preserved by pleasures and dissolved by pains.
   38. He is utterly small-minded for whom there are many plausible
reasons for committing suicide.
   39. The constant friend is neither he who always searches for utility,
nor he who never links [friendship to utility]. For the former makes
gratitude a matter for commercial transaction, while the latter kills off
good hope for the future.
   40. He who claims that everything occurs by necessity has no complaint
against him who claims that everything does not occur by necessity. For
he makes the very claim [in question] by necessity.
   41. One must philosophize and at the same time laugh and take care
of one's household and use the rest of our personal goods, and never
stop proclaiming the utterances of correct philosophy.
   42. In the same period of time both the greatest good and the disso-
lution <of bad> are produced.
   43. It is impious to love money unjustly, and shameful to do so justly;
for it is unfitting to be sordidly stingy even if one is just.
   44. When the wise man is brought face to face with the necessities of
life, he knows how to give rather than receive-such a treasury of self-
sufficiency has he found.
   45. Natural philosophy does not create boastful men nor chatterboxes
nor men who show off the 'culture' which the many quarrel over, but
rather strong and self-sufficient men, who pride themselves on their own
personal goods, not those of external circumstances.
   46. We utterly eliminate bad habits like wicked men who have been
doing great harm to us for a long time.
   48. [We should] try to make the later stretch of the road more important
than the earlier one, as long as we are on the road; and when we get to
the end [of the road], [we should] feel a smooth contentment.
    52. Friendship dances around the world announcing to all of us that
we must wake up to blessedness.
    53. One should envy no one. For the good are not worthy of envy,
and the more good fortune the wicked have, the more they spoil it
for themselves.
    54. One must not pretend to philosophize, but philosophize in reality.
For we do not need the semblance of health but true health.
    55. Misfortunes must be cured by a sense of gratitude for what has
been and the knowledge that what is past cannot be undone.
Ancient Collections of Maxims                                             39

   56-57. The wise man feels no more pain when he is tortured <than
when his friend is tortured, and will die on his behalf; for if he betrays>
his friend, his entire life will be confounded and utterly upset because
of a lack of confidence.
   58. They must free themselves from the prison of general education
and politics.
   59. The stomach is not insatiable, as the many say, but rather the
opinion that the stomach requires an unlimited amount of filling is false.
   60. Everyone leaves life as though he had just been born.
   61. The sight of one's neighbours is most beautiful if the first meeting
brings concord or [at least] produces a serious commitment to this.
   62. For if parents are justifiably angered at their children, it is surely
pointless to resist and not ask to be forgiven; but if [their anger] is not
justifiable but somewhat irrational, it is ridiculous for someone with
irrationality in his heart to appeal to someone set against appeals and not
to seek in a spirit of good will to win him over by other means.
   63. There is also a proper measure for parsimony, and he who does
not reason it out is just as badly off as he who goes wrong by total neglect
of limits.
   64. Praise from other men must come of its own accord; and we must
be concerned with healing ourselves.
   65. It is pointless to ask from the gods what one is fully able to supply
for oneself.
   66. Let us share our friends' suffering not with laments but with
thoughtful concern.
   67. A free life cannot acquire great wealth, because the task is not easy
without slavery to the mob or those in power; rather, it already possesses
everything in constant abundance. And if it does somehow achieve great
wealth, one could easily share this out in order to obtain the good will
of one's neighbours.
   68. Nothing is enough to someone for whom enough is little.
   69. The ingratitude of the soul makes an animal greedy for unlimited
variation in its life-style.
   70. Let nothing be done in your life which will cause you to fear if it
is discovered by your neighbour.
   71. One should bring this question to bear on all one's desires: what
will happen to me if what is sought by desire is achieved, and what will
happen if it is not?
   73. Even some bodily pains are worthwhile for fending off others
like them.
   74. In a joint philosophical investigation he who is defeated comes out
ahead in so far as he has learned something new.
40                                                               1-6 to 1-7

   75. This utterance is ungrateful for past goods: look to the end of a
long life.
   76. As you grow old, you are such as I would praise, and you have
seen the difference between what it means to philosophize for yourself
and what it means to do so for Greece. I rejoice with you.
   77. The greatest fruit of self-sufficiency is freedom.
   78. The noble man is most involved with wisdom and friendship, of
which one is a mortal good, the other immortal.
   79. He who is free from disturbance within himself also causes no
trouble for another.
   80. A young man's share in salvation comes from attending to his age
and guarding against what will defile everything through maddening de-
stres.
   81. The disturbance of the soul will not be dissolved nor will consider-
able joy be produced by the presence of the greatest wealth, nor by
honour and admiration among the many, nor by anything which is a
result of indefinite causes.


Doxographical Reports
Introductory report of Epicurus' views:                               [I-7]
Diogenes Laertius 10.29-34
   29 .... So philosophy is divided into three parts: canonic, physics,
ethics. 30. Canonic provides procedures for use in the system and it is
contained in one work entitled The Canon. Physics comprises the entire
study of nature and it is contained in the 37 books of the On Nature and
in outline form in the letters. Ethics comprises the discussion of choice
and avoidance and it is contained in the book On Ways of Lift and in
the letters and in On the Goal of Lift. They are accustomed, however,
to set out canonic together with physics and they describe it as dealing
with the criterion and with the basic principle, and as being fundamental.
And physics is about generation and destruction, and about nature. And
ethics is about things worth choosing and avoiding and about ways of
life and about the goal of life.
   31. They reject dialectic as being irrelevant. For it is sufficient for
natural philosophers to proceed according to the utterances made by the
facts. So, in The Canon Epicurus is found saying that sense-perceptions,
basic grasps, and feelings are the criteria of truth, and the Epicureans
add the applications of the intellect to presentations. He says this also
Doxographical Reports                                                         41

in the epitome addressed to Herodotus and in the Principal Doctrines.
"For," he says, "every sense-perception is unreasoning and incapable of
remembering. For neither is it moved by itself nor can it add or subtract
anything when moved by something else. Nor is there anything which
can refute sense-perceptions. 32. For a perception from one sense cannot
refute another of the same type, because they are of equal strength; nor
can a perception from one sense refute one from a different sense, because
they do not judge the same objects. Nor indeed can reasoning [refute
them]; for all reasoning depends on the sense-perceptions. Nor can one
sense-perception refute another, since we attend to them all. And the
fact of our awareness of sense-perceptions confirms the truth of the sense-
perceptions. And it is just as much a fact that we see and hear as that
we feel pain; hence, it is from the apparent that we must infer about the
non-evident. Moreover, all ideas are formed from sense-perceptions by
direct experience or by analogy or by similarity or by compounding,
with reasoning also making a contribution. And the appearances which
madmen have and those in dreams are true, for they cause motion [in
minds], and what does not exist does not move anything."
   33. They say that the basic grasp is like an act of grasping or a correct
opinion or a conception or a universal idea stored [up in the mind], i.e.,
a memory of what has often appeared in the external world. For example,
this sort of thing is "man". For as soon as "man" is uttered, immediately
one has an idea of the general outline of man, according to our basic
grasp, following the lead of our senses. Therefore, what is primarily
denoted by every word is something clear; and we could never have
inquired into an object if we had not first been aware of it. For example,
"is what is standing far off a horse or a cow?" For one must at some
time have been aware of the shape of horse and cow according to a
basic grasp.
   Nor would we have given a name to something if we had not first
learned its general outline according to a basic grasp. Therefore, our
basic grasps are clear. And an object of opinion depends on something
prior and clear, by referring to which we speak [of it], for example, "On
what basis do we know if this is a man?"
   34. And they also say that opinion is a supposition, and that it can be
true or false. For if it is testified for or not testified against, it is true.
But if it is not testified for or is testified against, it turns out false. Hence
they introduced the idea of "what awaits confirmation." For example,
one awaits confirmation of and comes nearer to a tower, to learn how it
appears close up.
   They say there are two feelings, pleasure and pain, which occur in
42                                                               1-7 to 1-9

every animal; and the one is congenial to us, the other uncongenial. By
means of them we judge what to choose and what to avoid. Of inquiries,
some deal with objective facts, others with mere words.
  This, then, is an elementary account of the division of philosophy and
the criterion.

Report of Epicurus' Ethical Views:                                    [1-8]
Diogenes Laertius 10.117-121
   117 .... He writes as follows on matters related to living and how we
should choose some things and avoid others. But first let us relate the
opinions of Epicurus and his followers about the wise man.
   Harm from other men comes either as a result of hate or envy or
contempt, which the wise man overcomes by reasoning. Moreover, once
a man has become wise he can no longer take on the opposite disposition
nor feign it willingly. But he will be more affected by feelings-for they
would not hinder his progress towards wisdom. Nor indeed could people
with every bodily condition become wise, nor can people from every
race. 118. And even if the wise man is tortured on the rack, he is happy.
Only the wise man will be grateful and he will persist in speaking well
of friends equally whether they are present or absent. But when he is
tortured on the rack he will moan and groan. The wise man will not
have intercourse with a woman in a manner forbidden by the laws,
according to Diogenes in his summary of Epicurus' ethical doctrines.
Nor will he punish his servants, but rather will pity them and forgive
one who is virtuous. They do not believe that the wise man will fall in
love, nor that he will worry about his burial, nor that love is sent by the
gods, according to Diogenes in his ... [There is a lacuna here.] ... Nor
will he be a good public speaker. "Sexual intercourse", they say, "never
helped anyone, and one must be satisfied if it has not harmed."
   119. And indeed the wise man will marry and father children, as
Epicurus says in his Problems and in the On Nature. But he will marry
[only] when it is indicated by the circumstances of his life at a given
time. And some will be diverted from this. Nor indeed will he rant and
rave while under the influence of drink, as Epicurus says in his Symposium.
Nor will he participate in civic life, as he says in book one of On Ways
of Lift. Neither will he be a tyrant or a Cynic, as he says in book two
of On Ways of Lift; nor will he be a beggar. But if he were to be blinded
he would go on living, as he says in the same book. And the wise man
will feel pain, as Diogenes says in book five of his Selections. 120a. And
he will serve as a juror, and leave written treatises, though he will not
deliver panegyrics. And he will take thought for his possessions and for
Doxographical Reports                                                   43

the future. He will like the countryside. He will resist fate, and will
betray none of his friends. He will take thought for good reputation only
so far as [to ensure] that he is not held in contempt. He will take more
delight in contemplation than other men.
   121b. He will erect statues. If he is <well> off, he will be indifferent
to it. Only the wise man could converse properly on music and poetry,
but he will not actually write poems. One [wise man] is no wiser than
another. He will earn money when in dire straits, but only by [exploiting]
his wisdom. And he will serve a monarch, when the occasion is appro-
priate. He will be grateful to someone for being corrected. And he will
set up a school, but not so as to draw a crowd. And he will give a public
reading, but not unless pressed. He will hold firm opinions and will not
be at a loss. And he will be of the same character while asleep. And he
will sometimes die for a friend.
   120b. They believe that [moral] errors are not equal. And that health
is for some a good thing and for others an indifferent. Courage does not
come to be by nature, but by a reasoning out of what is advantageous.
And friendship comes to be because of its utility; but one must neverthe-
less make a preliminary sacrifice [for a friend] (for one must also sow
the ground), and it is [then] formed by a sharing among those who are
fulfilled by their pleasures.
   121a. Happiness is conceived of in two ways: the highest happiness,
which is that of god and does not admit of further intensification, and
that which <is determined by> the addition and subtraction of pleasures.

Diogenes Laertius 10.136-138                                          [1-9]

   136. He disagrees with the Cyrenaics on the question of pleasure. For
they do not admit katastematic pleasure, but only kinetic pleasure, and
he admits both types in both the body and the soul, as he says in On
Choice and Avoidance and in On the Goal and in book one of On Ways
of Lift and in the Letter to His Friends in Mytilene. Similarly, Diogenes
too in book seventeen of his Selections and Metrodorus in the Timocrates
take the same position: both kinetic and katastematic pleasures are con-
ceived of as pleasure. And Epicurus, in his On Choices, says this: "For
freedom from disturbance and freedom from suffering are katastematic
pleasures; and joy and delight are viewed as kinetic and active."
   137. Further, he disagrees with the Cyrenaics [thus]. For they think
that bodily pains are worse than those of the soul, since people who err
are punished with bodily [pain], while he thinks that pains of the soul
are worse, since the flesh is only troubled by the present, but the soul
is troubled by the past and the present and the future. In the same way,
44                                                                 /-9 to /-14

then, the soul also has greater pleasures. And he uses as a proof that the
goal is pleasure the fact that animals, as soon as they are born are satisfied
with it but are in conflict with suffering by nature and apart from reason.
So it is by our experience all on its own that we avoid pain ....
   138. The virtues too are chosen because of pleasure, and not for their
own sakes, just as medicine is chosen because of health, as Diogenes too
says in book twenty of the Selections; he also says that basic education is
a [form of] pastime. And Epicurus says that only virtue is inseparable
from pleasure, and that the other things, such as food, may be separated
[from pleasure].

Diogenes Laertius 2.88-90 (an account of                               [1-10]
Cyrenaic hedonism)
   88. Particular pleasure is worth choosing for its own sake; happiness,
however, is not worth choosing for its own sake but because of the
particular pleasures. A confirmation that the goal is pleasure is found in
the fact that from childhood on we involuntarily find it [i.e., pleasure]
congenial and that when we get it we seek nothing more and that we
flee nothing so much as its opposite, pain. And pleasure is good even if
it comes from the most indecorous sources, as Hippobotus says in his
On Choices. For even if the deed is out of place, the pleasure at any rate
is worth choosing for its own sake and good.
   89. They hold that the removal of the feeling of pain is not pleasure,
as Epicurus said it was, and that absence of pleasure is not pain. For
both are kinetic, while neither absence of pain nor absence of pleasure
is a motion, since absence of pain is like the condition [katastasis] of
somebody who is asleep. They say that it is possible that some people
do not choose pleasure, because they are corrupted. However, not all
pleasures and pains of the soul occur as a result of bodily pleasures and
pains; for joy results from the simple prosperity of one's fatherland, just
as it does from one's own. But further, they say, pleasure is not produced
by the recollection or expectation of good things, as Epicurus thought.
For the soul's movement is dissolved by the passage of time. 90. They
say that pleasures are not produced by the simple act of vision or hearing.
At any rate we enjoy hearing those who imitate lamentations and do not
enjoy hearing genuine lamentations. [They held that] absence of pleasure
and absence of pain are intermediate conditions [katastaseis], and more-
over that bodily pleasures are much better than those of the soul, and
that bodily disturbances are worse. And that is why wrong-doers are
punished with these instead [of those]. For they supposed that being in
pain is more difficult and that enjoying pleasure is more congenial. ...
The Testimony of Cicero                                                  45

Clement of Alexandria Stromates: 2.21,127.2                           [1-11]
p. 182 Stahlin (450 U)
   For the Cyrenaics and Epicurus belong to the class of those who take
their starting point from pleasure; for they say expressly that living
pleasantly is the goal and that only pleasure is the perfect good, but
Epicurus says that the removal of pain is also pleasure; and he says that
that which first and by itself draws [us] to itself is worth choosing, and
obviously this thing is certainly kinetic.

Ibid.: 2.21,128.1, p. 182 Stahlin (509 U)                             [1-12]

  Epicurus and the Cyrenaics say that what is primarily [or: at first]
congenial to us is pleasure; for virtue comes along for the sake of pleasure
and produces pleasure.

Ibid. 2.21,130.8-9 pp. 184-5 Stahlin (451 U)                          [1-13]

   ... These Cyrenaics reject Epicurus' definition of pleasure, i.e., the
removal of what causes pain, stigmatizing it as the condition of a corpse;
for we rejoice not only over pleasures, but also over conversations and
ambitions. But Epicurus thinks that all joy of the soul supervenes on the
prior experiences of the body.



The Testimony of Cicero
   The Roman statesman and philosophical writer, Cicero (active in the
first century B.c.), was a lively critic of Epicureanism. He is sometimes
unfair and dismissive, but even his polemic yields information of value
to the student of Epicureanism.

On Goals 1.18-20                                                      [1-14]

   18. Epicurus generally does not go far wrong when he follows Democri-
tus ... but these are the catastrophes which belong to Epicurus alone.
He thinks that these same indivisible and solid bodies move down in a
straight line by their own weight and that this is the natural motion of
all bodies. 19. Then this clever fellow, when it occurred to him that if
they all moved directly down and, as I said, in a straight line, it would
never come about that one atom could make contact with another and
so ... he introduced a fictitious notion: he said that an atom swerves by
46                                                               1-14 to 1-15

a very little bit, indeed a minimal distance, and that in this way are
produced the mutual entanglements, linkages, and cohesions of the atoms
as a result of which the world and all the parts of the world and everything
in it are produced .... The swerve itself is made up to suit his pleasure-
for he says that the atom swerves without a cause ... -and without a
cause he tore from the atoms that straight downward motion which is
natural to all heavy objects (as he himself declared); and by so doing he
did not even achieve the goal he intended when he made up this fiction.
20. For if all the atoms swerve, none will ever cohere in a compound;
but if some swerve and some move properly by their own impetus, this
will amount, first of all, to assigning different spheres of influence, so to
speak, to the atoms, some to move straight, others to move crookedly;
and second, that very same confused concourse of atoms (and this is the
point which Democritus too had trouble with) will not be able to produce
the orderly beauty of this world.

On Fate 18-48 (selections)                                            [1-15]

   18. If it were stated thus, "Scipio will die by violence at night in his
room", that would be a true statement. For it would be a statement that
what was going to occur actually was going to occur; and one ought to
know that it was going to occur from the fact that it did happen. And
"Scipio will die" was no more true than "he will die in that manner",
nor was it any more necessary that he die than that he die in that manner;
nor was [the statement that] "Scipio was killed" any more immune from
a change from truth to falsehood than [the statement that] "Scipio will
be killed".
   And the fact that these things are so does not mean that Epicurus has
any reason to fear fate and seek aid from the atoms by making them
swerve from their paths, and so at one time to burden himself with two
unsolvable difficulties: first, that something should occur without a cause,
which means that something comes to be from nothing (and neither he
nor any other physicist believes that); second, that when two atoms move
through the void one goes in a straight line and the other swerves.
   19. Epicurus can concede that every proposition is either true or false
and still not fear that it is necessary that everything occur by fate. For
it is not in virtue of eternal causes derived from a necessity of nature
that the following proposition is true: "Carneades will go down to the
Academy"; but neither is it uncaused. Rather, there is a difference between
causes which just happen to precede [the event] and causes which contain
in themselves a natural efficacy. So it always was true that "Epicurus
The Testimony of Cicero                                                    47
will die at the age of seventy-two in the archonship of Pytharatus", but
there were not any fated causes why it should occur like this; rather,
what happened certainly was going to happen as it [indeed did] happen.
20. And those who say that what is going to occur is immutable and that
a true future statement cannot be converted into a false one are not in
fact asserting the necessity of fate, but merely indicating what our words
mean. But those who introduce an eternal series of causes are the ones
who strip the human mind of free will and bind it by the necessity of fate.
   But so much for this; let us move on. Chrysippus reasons thus. "If
there is a motion without a cause, not every proposition, which the
dialecticians call an axioma, will be either true or false. For what will not
have effective causes will be neither true nor false. But every proposition is
either true or false. Therefore, there is no motion without a cause. 21.
And if this is so, everything which happens happens in virtue of prior
causes; and if this is so, all things happen by fate. So it is shown that
whatever happens happens by fate."
   First of all, if I here chose to agree with Epicurus and deny that every
proposition is either true or false, I would rather accept that blow than
approve of the claim that all things happen by fate. For that claim is at
least subject to debate, but this latter is intolerable. And so Chrysippus
exerts all his efforts to persuade us that every axioma is either true or
false. Just as Epicurus fears that if he should concede this, he must
concede that whatever happens happens by fate (for if one of the two is
true from eternity, it is also certain, and if certain, then necessary too:
that is how he thinks that necessity and fate are confirmed), so Chrysippus
feared that, if he did not maintain that every proposition was either true
or false, he could not maintain that everything happened by fate and as
a result of eternal causes of future events.
   22. But Epicurus thinks that the necessity of fate can be avoided by
the swerve of an atom. And so a third kind of motion appears, in addition
to weight and collision, when an atom swerves by a minimal interval (he
calls it an elachiston [smallest]); and he is forced to concede, in fact if
not in his words, that this swerve is uncaused. For an atom does not
swerve because it is struck by another atom. For how can one be struck
by another if the atomic bodies are moving, owing to their weight,
downward in straight lines, as Epicurus thinks? It follows that, if one
atom is never displaced by another, then one atom cannot even contact
another. 23. From which it is also concluded that if an atom exists and
it does swerve, it does so without cause. Epicurus introduced this line
of reasoning because he was afraid that if an atom always moved by its
natural and necessary heaviness, we would have no freedom, since our
48                                                                     1-15

mind would be moved in such a way that it would be compelled by the
motion of atoms. Democritus, the founder of atomism, preferred to accept
that all things happened by necessity than to tear from the atomic bodies
their natural motions.
   Carneades was even more acute and showed that the Epicureans could
defend their case without this fictitious swerve. For since they taught
that there could be a voluntary motion of the mind, it was better to
defend that claim than to introduce the swerve, especially since they
could not find a cause for it. And if they defended this [the possibility
of a voluntary motion of the mind] they could easily resist Chrysippus'
attack. For although they conceded that there was no motion without a
cause, they did not concede that everything which occurred occurred by
antecedent causes. For there are no external and antecedent causes for
our will. 24. Thus we [merely] exploit the common linguistic convention
when we say that someone wills or does not will something without
cause. For we say "without cause" in order to indicate "without external
and antecedent cause," not "without any cause at all"; just as when we
refer to an "empty jar" we do not speak as the physicists do, who do
not believe that there is a genuinely empty space, but to indicate that
the jar is without water or wine or oil, for example. Thus when we say
that the mind is moved without cause, we say that it is moved without
an external and antecedent cause, not without any cause at all. It can
even be said of the atom itself that it moves without a cause when it
moves through the void because of weight and heaviness, since there is
no external cause.
   25. But again, to avoid being mocked by the physicists if we say that
anything occurs without a cause, one must make a distinction and say
that the nature of the atom itself is such that it moves because of weight
and heaviness and that exactly this is the cause of its moving the way it
does. Similarly, no external cause is needed for the voluntary motions
of the mind; for voluntary motion itself contains within it a nature such
that it is in our power and obeys us, but not without a cause. Its very
nature is the cause of this fact.
   37 .... But from all eternity this proposition was true: "Philoctetes
will be abandoned on the island", and this was not able to change from
being true to being false. For it is necessary, when you have two contradic-
tories-and here I call contradictories statements one of which affirms
something and the other of which denies it-of these, then, it is necessary
that one be true and the other false, though Epicurus disagrees. For
example, "Philoctetes will be wounded" was true during all previous
ages, and "he will not be wounded" was false. Unless, perhaps, we want
The Testimony of Cicero                                                  49

to accept the view of the Epicureans, who say that such propositions are
neither true nor false, or, since they are ashamed of that, say what is [in
fact] even more outrageous: that disjunctions of such contradictories are
true, but that neither of the propositions contained in them is true. 38.
What an amazing audacity and what a wretched ignorance of logic! For
if in speech there is something which is neither true nor false, certainly
it is not true. But how can what is not true not be false? Or how can
what is not false not be true? So the principle defended by Chrysippus
will be retained, that every proposition is either true or false. Reason
itself will require that certain things be true from all eternity, that they
not have been bound by eternal causes, and that they be free from the
necessity of fate ....
   46. This is how this matter should be discussed, rather than seeking
help from wandering atoms which swerve from their [natural] course.
He says, "an atom swerves." First of all, why? Democritus had already
given them another kind of force, that of collision, which he called a
"blow"; and you, Epicurus, had given them the force of heaviness and
weight. What new cause, then, is there in nature which would make the
atom swerve? Or surely you don't mean that they draw lots with each
other to see which ones will swerve and which not? Or why do they
swerve by the minimal interval, and not by a larger amount? Or why do
they swerve by one minimal interval, and not by two or three? This is
wishful thinking, not argument. 47. For you do not say that the atom
moves from its place and swerves because it is struck from outside, nor
that there is in the void through which the atom moves any trace of a
cause for it not to move in a straight line, nor is there any change in the
atom itself which would cause it not to maintain the natural motion of
its weight. So, although he adduced no cause to produce that swerve,
he still thinks that he is making sense when he makes the claim which
everyone's mind rejects and recoils from. 48. And I do not think that
there is anyone who does more to confirm, not just fate, but even a
powerful necessity governing all things, or who has more effectively
abolished voluntary motions of the mind, than [Epicurus], who concedes
that he could not have resisted fate in any other way than by taking
refuge in these fictitious swerves. For even supposing that there were
atoms, which can in no way be proven to my satisfaction, nevertheless,
those swerves will remain unexplained. For if it is by natural necessity
that atoms move [downwards] owing to their weight, since it is necessary
that every heavy body should move and be carried along when there is
nothing to prevent it, then it is also necessary for certain atoms (or, if
they prefer, all atoms) to swerve, ... naturally ...
50                                                                     1-16

On the Nature ofthe Gods 1.43-56                                     [1-16]
   43 .... For he [Epicurus] is the only one who saw, first, that the gods
exist, because nature herself has impressed a conception of them on the
souls of everyone. For what people or race of men is there which does
not have, even without being taught, a basic grasp of the gods, which is
what Epicurus calls a prolepsis, i.e., a kind of outline of the thing [in
question], which is antecedently grasped by the mind, and without which
nothing can be either understood or investigated or debated? We have
learned the force and utility of this line of inference from that divine
book of Epicurus on the canon or standard [of truth]. 44. You see, then,
that the point which is the foundation of this investigation has been laid
very well indeed. For since the opinion is established not on the basis
of some convention or custom or law, but is and remains a solid and
harmonious consensus of all men, it is necessary to understand that there
are gods, because we have implanted, or rather innate, conceptions of
them. For what all men by nature agree about must necessarily be true.
So one must concede that the gods exist. Since this point is accepted by
virtually everyone, philosophers and laymen alike, let us admit that the
following point too is established, that we have this basic grasp, as I said
before, or preconception about the gods-for new names must be assigned
to new things, just as Epicurus himself referred to a prolepsis, which no
one had previously designated by this term-45. we have, then, this basic
grasp, that we consider the gods to be blessed and immortal. And the
same nature which gave us an outline of the gods themselves has also
inscribed in our minds the notion that they are eternal and blessed. And
if this is so, that was a true maxim expounded by Epicurus, that what
is blessed and eternal neither has any troubles of its own nor provides
them to others, and so is subject to neither anger nor gratitude, since
everything of this nature is weak. 23
   Enough would have been said already, if all we were looking for were
pious worship of the gods and freedom from superstition; for the excellent
nature of the gods would be worshipped by pious men because of that
nature's blessedness and eternity (for whatever is excellent is justifiably
the object of reverence), and all fears of the anger or power of the gods
would have been expelled (for it is understood that anger and gratitude
are banned from a blessed and immortal nature, and when these are
removed no fears about the beings above hang over us). But in order to
confirm this opinion, the mind enquires into the form of god, the kind


23. Principal Doctrine I.
The Testimony of Cicero                                                               51

of activity which characterizes his life, and the mode of operation of
his intellect.
    46. Nature tells us part of what we need to know about the form of
the gods, and the rest is the instruction of reason. For by nature all of
us, men of all races, have no other view of the gods but that they have
human form; for what other form ever appears to anyone either waking
or sleeping? But so that every point will not be referred to the primary
notions, reason herself reveals the same thing. 47. For it seems appropriate
that the most excellent nature, excellent either for its blessedness or for
its eternity, should also be the most beautiful. So what configuration
of the limbs, what arrangement of features, what shape, what general
appearance can be more beautiful than the human? ... 48. But if the
human shape is superior to the form of all living things, and a god is a
living thing, then certainly he has that shape which is most beautiful of
all. And since it is agreed that the gods are most blessed, but no one can
be blessed without virtue, nor can virtue exist without reason, nor can
reason exist except in a human form, one must concede that the gods
have human appearance. 49. But that appearance is not [really] a body,
but a quasi-body, nor does a god have blood, but quasi-blood.
    Although Epicurus was so acute in the discovery of these truths and
expounded them so subtly that not just anyone could grasp them, still
I can rely on your intelligence and expound them more briefly than the
subject matter actually demands. Epicurus, then, who not only has a
mental vision of hidden and deeply abstruse matters but even manipulates
them as though they were tangible, teaches us that the force and nature
of the gods is as follows. First, they are perceived not by the senses but
by the intellect, and not in virtue of some solidity or numerical identity
(like those things which because of their resistance he calls 'solids' [sterem-
nia]), but rather because the images [of the gods] are perceived by virtue
of similarity and transference; and since an unlimited series of very similar
images arises from innumerable atoms and flows to24 the gods, our intellect
attends to those images and our intelligence is fixed on them with the
greatest possible pleasure, and so it grasps the blessed and eternal nature
[of the gods]. 50. It is most worthwhile to reflect long and hard on the
tremendous power of infinity, which we must understand is such as to
make it possible that all [classes of] things have an exact and equal
correspondence with all other [classes of] things. Epicurus calls this
isonomia, i.e., equal distribution. In virtue of this it comes about that if

24. This is the reading of the manuscripts. Many editors accept the simple and attractive
emendation "from the gods."
52                                                            1-16 to 1-17

there is such and such a number of mortal beings, there is no less a
number of immortal beings, and if there is an innumerable set of forces
which destroy, there ought also to be an infinite set of forces which pre-
serve.
   Balbus, you [Stoics] often ask us what the life of the gods is like and
how they pass their time. 51. Well, they spend their time in such a
manner that nothing can be conceived which is more blessed or better
supplied with all kinds of good things. For a god is idle, is entangled
with no serious preoccupations, undertakes no toilsome labour, but simply
rejoices in his own wisdom and virtue, being certain that he will always
be in the midst of pleasures which are both supreme and eternal. 52.
This god we could properly call blessed, but your [i.e., the Stoic] god
is assigned to very hard labour. For if god is the world itself, what can
be less restful than to be revolving around the heaven's axis at amazing
speed, with not even a moment of rest? But nothing is blessed if it is
not at rest. But if there is some god in the world to rule and guide it,
to maintain the orbits of the heavenly bodies, the changes of the seasons
and the ordered variations of [natural] events, to oversee land and sea to
ensure that men have lives full of advantages, then surely that god is
entangled with burdensome and laborious obligations. 53. But we claim
that happiness is a matter of freedom from disturbance in the mind and
leisure from all duties. For the same person who taught us the rest [of
this theory] also taught us that the world was produced by nature and
that there was no need for someone to make it, and that the task which
you say cannot be carried out without divine wisdom is so easy that
nature has produced, is producing and will produce an unlimited number
of worlds. Since you do not see how nature can do so without [the use
of] intelligence, you take refuge like tragedians in [the agency of] god
when you cannot work out the conclusion of the plot. 54. You would
certainly not need the assistance of god if you realized the unlimited
magnitude of space which is unbounded in all directions; the intellect
casts itself into and contemplates this [infinity] and travels so far and
wide that it can see no final boundary at which it might stop. So, in this
immense length, breadth, and height there flies about an infinite quantity
of innumerable atoms, which (despite the interspersal of void) cling to
each other and are linked together by their mutual contacts. From this
are produced those forms and shapes which you think cannot be produced
without the use of a veritable blacksmith's shop! And so you have bur-
dened us with the yoke of an eternal master whom we are to fear by day
and by night; for who would not fear an inquisitive and busy god who
foresees everything, thinks about and notices everything, and supposes
that everything is his own business? 55. This is the origin of that fated
The Testimony of Cicero                                                  53

necessity which you call heimarmene, and which leads you to say that
whatever happens has flowed from an eternal [set of] truth[s] and a
continuous chain of causes. But how much is your philosophy worth, if
it thinks, like old women-and uneducated ones at that-that everything
occurs by fate. Your mantike follows too, which is called 'divination' in
Latin, because of which we would be drenched in such superstition (if
we were prepared to listen to you [Stoics]) that we would have to worship
the soothsayers and augurs, the oracular priests and the prophets, and
even the diviners! 56. We are freed from these terrifying fears by Epicurus;
we are liberated from them! We do not fear [gods] whom we know do
not create trouble for themselves nor for anyone else, and we worship
in piety and holiness their excellent and supreme nature.

On the Nature ofthe Gods 1.69-76 excerpts                            [1-17]

   69. You [Epicureans] do this all the time. You say something implausi-
ble and want to avoid criticism, so you adduce something which is
absolutely impossible to support it! It would be better to give up the
point under attack than to defend it in such a brazen manner. For
example, when Epicurus saw that, if the atoms moved by their own
weight straight down, nothing would be in our power, since the atoms'
movements would be certain and necessitated, he found a way to avoid
necessity-a point which had escaped Democritus' notice. He says that
an atom, although it moves downward in a straight line because of its
weight and heaviness, swerves a little bit. 70. This claim is more shameful
than the inability to defend the point he is trying to support. He does
the same thing in his debate with the dialecticians. They have an accepted
teaching to the effect that, in all disjunctions which have the form "either
this or not this," one of the two disjuncts must be true; but Epicurus
was afraid that if a statement such as "Epicurus will either be alive
tomorrow or he will not" were admitted, then one of the two disjuncts
would be necessary. So he denied that all statements of the form "either
this or not this" were necessary. What could be more stupid than this?
   Arcesilaus attacked Zeno because, while he himself said that all sense-
perceptions were false, Zeno said that some were false, but not all.
Epicurus was afraid that, if one sense-perception were false, none would
be true; so he said that all sense-perceptions were messengers of the
truth. None of these cases shows great cleverness; in order to ward off
a minor blow, he opened himself up to a more serious one.
   71. He does the same thing with the nature of the gods. While trying
to avoid saying that [the gods are] a dense compound of atoms, so that
he will not have to admit that they perish and dissipate, he says that the
54                                                             /-17 to /-18

gods do not have a body, but only a quasi-body, and that they do not
have blood, but only quasi-blood. It is taken to be remarkable if one
soothsayer can see another without laughing, but it is even more remark-
able, that you [Epicureans] can restrain your laughter when you are by
yourselves. "This is not a body, but a quasi-body"; I could understand
what this would be like if we were talking about waxen images and
earthenware figurines. But I cannot understand what quasi-body and
quasi-blood are supposed to be in the case of a god. And neither can
you, Velleius, but you don't want to admit it ....
   . . . 73. Now, what do you understand by that quasi-body and quasi-
blood? 74. Not only do I concede that you understand them better than
I, but I am even happy about it. But when the idea is expressed in words,
what reason is there that Velleius should be able to understand it and
Cotta should not? So I know what body is and what blood is; but in no
way do I understand what quasi-body is or what quasi-blood is. Yet you
do not hide [your view] from me, as Pythagoras used to hide his views
from outsiders, nor do you deliberately speak in riddles like Heraclitus;
rather, to speak frankly between ourselves, you yourself do not under-
stand. 75. I am aware that you contend that there is a kind of image of
the gods which has nothing solid or dense about it, no definite shape,
no depth, but is refined, light, and translucent. So we will speak of it as
we do of the Venus on Cos: it is not a body but like a body, and the
blush blended with pallor which suffuses [her skin] is not blood but a
sort of semblance of blood. In the same way Epicurean gods are not real
things but semblances of real things.
   But suppose that I believe in things which I cannot even understand.
Now show me the outlines and shapes of those shadowy gods of yours!
76. Here you suffer from no lack of arguments designed to show that
the gods have human form. First [is the argument that] our minds contain
an outline and basic grasp of such a nature that when a man thinks about
a god, a human form appears to him; second, that since the divine nature
is better than everything else, it ought also to have the most beautiful
form, and none is more beautiful than the human form; the third argument
you adduce is that no other shape can house an intellect.

On the Nature ofthe Gods 1.103-110                                  [1-18]

   103. Let us suppose it true, then, as you wish, that god is an image
and semblance of man: what home, what dwelling, what place does he
have? what, indeed, are his activities? in virtue of what is he, as you
claim, happy? For he who is going to be happy ought to both use and
enjoy his own goods. And even inanimate natures have each their own
The Testimony of Cicero                                                                  55

proper place; for example, earth occupies the lowest place, water floods
the earth, air is above it, and the highest reaches [of the cosmos] are set
aside for the fires of the heavens. Some animals are terrestrial, some
aquatic, some are 'double', as it were, living in both environments; there
are even some which are thought to be born in fire and which often
appear flying about in blazing furnaces! 104. So I ask, first, where does
this god of yours live? next, what cause motivates him to move spatially-
if, that is, he ever does move? then, since it is characteristic of animals
that they pursue what is adapted to their nature, what does god pursue?
to what, pray tell, does he apply his mind and reason? finally, how is he
happy, how is he eternal?
    Whichever of these issues you touch on, it is a weak spot. A theory
with such a bad foundation cannot come to a successful conclusion. 105.
You claimed that the appearance of god is perceived by thought, not the
senses; that it has no solidity and is not numerically identical over time;
that the visual image of it is such that it is discerned by similarity and
transference; that there is an unfailing supply of similar [images] from
the infinite atoms; and that this is why our mind, when directed at these
things, believes that their nature is blessed and eternal. Now, in the name
of the very gods we are talking about, what sort of a claim is this? For
if they are only valid for thought and have no solidity or depth, then
what difference does it make whether we think about a centaur or a god?
The rest of the philosophers call that sort of mental condition an 'empty
motion [of the mind]', but you claim that it is the approach and entry
of images into the mind. 106. So when I seem to see Tiberius Gracchus
making a speech on the Capitol and bringing out the voting-urn for the
verdict on Marcus Octavius, I say that is an empty motion of the mind;
but you say that the images of Gracchus and Octavius, which arrived at
the Capitol and came to my mind, persist25-and that the same thing
happens in the case of god (by whose image our minds are frequently
struck) and that this is why the gods are thought of as blessed and eternal.
    107. Suppose that there are images which strike our minds; it is still
only a certain appearance put before us and not also a reason for it to
be happy and eternal. What are these images of yours, and where do they
come from? Of course, this free-wheeling idea came from Democritus. But

25. Many translators and editors emend the text of this very difficult sentence. Cicero's
hasty composition makes certainty impossible, but the sense seems to be this: images of
Gracchus and Octavius travel to the Capitol hill, where their famous confrontation took
place in 133 B. c.-almost sixty years before the dramatic date of the dialogue! These images
meet at the Capitol and then travel on to Cotta's mind, where together they present him
with a visual impression of the event as occurring at the Capitol. The absurdity of such
a theory, which Cotta claims the Epicureans are committed to, is evident.
56                                                             /-18 to /-21

he has been criticized by many, and you [Epicureans] cannot find a way
out. The whole theory wobbles and limps. For what could be less plausible
than that my mind is struck by images of Homer, Archilochus, Romulus,
Numa, Pythagoras, and Plato, let alone by images faithful to the original
people! So how do those people [come to my mind]? And whose images
are these? Aristotle holds that the poet Orpheus never existed and the
Pythagoreans claim that the surviving Orphic poem was written by a
certain Cercon. But Orpheus, i.e., on your theory his image, often comes
into my mind. 108. And what about the fact that your mind and mine
receive different images of the same man? What about the fact that we
get images of things which never existed at all and never could have,
like Scylla and Charybdis? What about the fact that we get images of
people, places, and cities which we have never seen? What about the fact
that an image is instantly available as soon as I feel like it? What about
the fact that images come unbidden, even to those who are asleep. Velleius'
whole theory is nonsense! But you [Epicureans] impose these images not
just on our eyes, but on our minds too-that's how recklessly you blather
on! 109. And how careless it is. 'There is a steady succession of flowing
visual images so that the many produce the appearance of one.' I would
be ashamed to admit that I don't understand this, if you yourselves, who
defend this stuff, really understood it. For how do you prove that the
images move continuously, or if they do move continuously, how are
they eternal? 'The infinity of atoms keeps the supply up,' he says. So
does the same 'infinity of atoms' make everything eternal? You take
refuge in 'equal distribution' (let us use this term for isonomia, if you
will) and say that, since there exists a mortal nature, there must also
exist an immortal nature. By that reasoning, since men are mortal, there
should be some immortal men too, and since they are born on land, they
should also be born in water. 'And because there are forces of destruction,
there must also be forces of preservation.' Of course there are. But they
preserve things which exist; but I don't think those gods exist. 110.
Anyway, how do all your images of things arise from the atomic bodies?
Even if they existed, which they don't, they might perhaps bump into
each other and be shaken up by their collisions; but they could not impart
form, shape, colour, and life. Therefore you [Epicureans] utterly fail to
show that there is an immortal god.

Tusculan Disputations 3.41-42                                       [1-19]
  41. ... Are these your words, [Epicurus,] or not? In the book which
sums up your entire teaching you say this (and here I merely translate,
so that no one will think that I am making this up): "Nor do I know
The Testimony of Cicero                                                      57

what I could understand that good to be, if I set aside the pleasures we
get from sex, from listening to songs, from looking at [beautiful] shapes,
from smooth motions, or any other pleasures which affect any of man's
senses. Nor, indeed, can it be said that only mental rejoicing is [to be
counted] among the goods; for this is my understanding of mental rejoic-
ing: it lies in the expectation that our nature will avoid pain while acquiring
all those things I just mentioned." 42. That is exactly what he said, so
that anyone can grasp what kind of pleasure Epicurus recognizes. Then
a bit later: "I have often asked," he says, "those who are called wise,
what they would have left [to put] in the category of goods if they
removed those things-unless they were willing to emit empty sounds.
I was able to learn nothing from them. And if they wish to burble about
virtues and wisdom, they will be referring to nothing except the means
by which those pleasures which I mentioned above are produced."

Tusculan Disputations 3.47                                               [I-20]
  The same man says that pleasure does not increase once pain is re-
moved, but that the greatest pleasure lies in not being in pain ....

On Goals 1.29-33                                                         [I-21]
   29 .... First, then, he said, I will handle the subject in the manner
approved of by the founder of this school: I will settle what it is that we
are talking about and what qualities it has, not because I think that you
do not know, but so that my discourse might proceed in an orderly and
systematic fashion. So, we are asking what is the final and ultimate
good, which according to the view of all philosophers ought to be what
everything should be referred to, but which should itself be referred to
nothing else. Epicurus places this in pleasure, which he claims is the
highest good and that pain is the greatest bad thing. And the beginning
of his teaching about this is as follows.
   30. As soon as each animal is born, it seeks pleasure and rejoices in it
as the highest good, and rejects pain as the greatest bad thing, driving
it away from itself as effectively as it can; and it does this while it is still
not corrupted, while the judgement of nature herself is unperverted and
sound. Therefore, he says that there is no need of reason or debate about
why pleasure is to be pursued and pain to be avoided. He thinks that
these things are perceived, as we perceive that fire is hot, that snow is
white, that honey is sweet. None of these things requires confirmation
by sophisticated argumentation; it is enough just to have them pointed
out. For there is a difference between the rational conclusion of an
argument and simply pointing something out; for the former reveals
58                                                              /-21 to /-23

certain hidden and, as it were, arcane facts, while the latter indicates
things which are evident and out in the open. Moreover, since there is
nothing left if you deprive man of his sense-perception, it is necessary
that nature herself judge what is natural and what is unnatural. And
what does nature perceive or judge, with reference to what does she
decide to pursue or avoid something, except pleasure and pain?
   31. There are, however, some members of our school [Epicureans]
who want to teach a more subtle form of this doctrine, and they say that
it is not sufficient to let sense-perception judge what is good and what
is bad, but that the intellect and reason can also understand that pleasure
by itself is worth pursuing for its own sake and that pain by itself is to
be avoided for its own sake. And so they say that we have this conception,
which is, as it were, naturally implanted in our souls, and that as a result
of this we perceive that the one is to be pursued and the other to be
rejected. But there are other Epicureans too, men with whom I agree,
who do not think it right for us to be too sure of our case, since so many
philosophers say so much about why pleasure ought not to be counted
as a good thing and pain ought not to be counted as a bad thing; they
think that one must argue and debate with great care, and employ well
researched lines of argument in the dispute about pleasure and pain.
   32. But so that you will see the origin of the mistake made by those
who attack pleasure and praise pain, I shall open up the whole theory
and explain exactly what was said by that discoverer of the truth [Epicu-
rus], who was a kind of architect of the happy life. No one rejects or
dislikes or avoids pleasure itself just because it is pleasure, but rather
because those who do not know how to pursue pleasure rationally meet
with great pains as a result. Nor again is there anyone who loves, pursues,
and wants to acquire pain just because it is pain, but rather because
sometimes circumstances of such a nature occur that he can pursue some
great pleasure by means of effort and pain. To cite a minor instance:
who among us undertakes any demanding regimen of physical training
except in order to get some sort of benefit from it? Who, moreover, could
justifiably criticize either a man who wished to have the sort of pleasure
which is followed by no pains or a man who avoids a pain which serves
to produce no pleasure?
   33. But we do attack and indeed find most worthy of justified hatred
those who are seduced and corrupted by the allures of present pleasures
and, being blinded by desire, do not foresee the pains and troubles which
they are bound to incur; similarly to blame are those who abandon their
duties because of moral weakness, i.e., a tendency to avoid efforts and
pains. The distinction here is simple and clear enough. For at a moment
of free time, when we have an unrestricted opportunity to select and
The Testimony of Cicero                                                      59

there is no hindrance to our doing what will be most pleasing to us, [in
such circumstances] every pleasure is to be accepted and every pain
rejected. But at certain other times, because of the press of responsibilities
or the obligations imposed by circumstances it will often happen that
pleasures are to be turned down and pains are not to be rejected. And
so the wise man sticks with this [principle of] of choosing, that he either
acquires greater pleasures by rejecting some of them, or that he avoids
worse pains by enduring some of them.

On Goals 1.37-38                                                         [I-22]
   37 .... Now I will explain what pleasure is and what it is like, to
remove any misunderstandings which inexperienced people may have
and to help them to understand how serious, self-controlled, and stern
our doctrine is, though it is commonly held to be hedonistic, slack and
soft. For we do not just pursue the kind [of pleasure] which stimulates
our nature itself with a kind of smoothness and is perceived by the senses
with a sort of sweetness, but rather we hold that the greatest pleasure is
that which is perceived when all pain is removed. For since when we
are freed from pain we rejoice in this very liberation from and absence
of annoyance, and since everything in which we rejoice is a pleasure (just
as everything which irritates us is a pain), then it is right to call the
absence of all pain pleasure. Just as when hunger and thirst are driven
out by food and drink, the very removal of annoyance brings with it a
resulting pleasure, so in every case too the removal of pain brings with
it a consequent pleasure. 38. So Epicurus did not think that there was
some intermediate state between pleasure and pain; for that state which
some people think is an intermediate state, viz. the absence of all pain,
is not only pleasure but it is even the greatest pleasure. For whoever
perceives the state which he is in must in fact be in pleasure or in pain.
But Epicurus thinks that the limit for the greatest pleasure is set by the
absence of all pain; and though later [i.e., after all pain has been eliminated]
pleasure can be varied and adorned, it cannot be increased or augmented.

On Goals 1.55-57                                                         [I-23]
   55. I shall give a brief account of what follows from this firm and well
established view. There is no possibility of mistake about the limits of
good and bad themselves, that is about pleasure and pain; but people do
make mistakes in these matters when they are ignorant of the means by
which they are produced. Moreover, we say that the pleasures and pains
of the mind take their origin from the pleasures and pains of the body
(and so I concede the point which you were making recently, that any
60                                                                /-23 to /-26

Epicurean who disagrees is abandoning his case-and I know that there
are many who do so, but they are inexperienced); moreover, although
mental pleasure and pain do produce good and bad feelings, nevertheless
both of them have their origins in the body and take the body as their
point of reference; nevertheless, the pleasures and pains of the mind are
much greater than those of the body. For with the body we can perceive
nothing except what immediately affects it in the present, but with the
mind we can also perceive past and future. Even granted that when we
feel pain in the body our pain is equal [to what we feel in the mind],
still there can be a very large increase [in this pain] if we think that there
is some eternal and unlimited bad thing hanging over us. And you may
transfer the point to pleasure, so that it is greater if we are not afraid of
some such thing. 56. But this point, at any rate, is already clear, that the
greatest pleasure or annoyance in the mind makes much more difference
to the production of a blessed or wretched life than either one of them
would if they lasted an equally long time in the body. But we do not
think that pain immediately follows as soon as pleasure is removed, unless
by chance a pain should move into the place of the pleasure; on the other
hand we are delighted when pains are eliminated even if no pleasure of
the kind which stimulates the senses moves into their place; and from
this one can understand just how great a pleasure it is to be free of pain.
   57. But just as we are thrilled by the expectation of good things, so
too we are pleased by the recollection of good things. But fools are
tortured by the recollection of bad things, while wise men enjoy past
goods kept fresh by a grateful recollection. For it is a deeply rooted part
of human nature to bury in virtually eternal oblivion things which go
badly and to recall with satisfaction and contentment things which go
well. But when we contemplate past events with a keen and attentive
mind, then we feel distress if what we recall was bad, and joy if it was good.

On Goals 2.98                                                          [I-24]
   You have often said that no one rejoices or feels pain except because
of the body ... you deny that there is any joy in the mind which is not
referred to the body.

Tusculan Disputations 5.93-96                                          [I-25]
   93. You realize, I believe, how Epicurus divided the kinds of desires,
perhaps not in a very sophisticated fashion, but usefully at any rate.
Some are natural and necessary, some natural and not necessary, some
neither [natural nor necessary]. The necessary can be satisfied with next
to nothing; for nature's riches are easily acquired. He holds that the
The Testimony of Cicero                                                    61

second type of desires is not difficult, either to acquire or to do without.
The third type he thought should be utterly rejected, since they are
clearly vain and not only unnecessary but also unnatural. 94. At this
point the Epicureans make a number of arguments and make excuses
one by one for the pleasures of the types which they do not condemn,
but which they <do not> seek an abundance of. For they say that even
obscene pleasures, which they spend quite a bit of time talking about,
are easy, common, and readily available; and that if nature does require
them they must be evaluated not with reference to family background,
social station, or rank, but only with respect to beauty, age, and figure;
and it is not at all difficult to refrain from them, if that is required by
poor health, duty, or concern for one's reputation; and in general, that
this type of pleasure is to be chosen, if it does not do any harm, but that
it never actually benefits anyone. 95. The upshot of his entire discussion
of pleasure is this. He holds that pleasure itself should always be wished
for and pursued for its own sake because it is pleasure, and that by the
same reasoning pain should always be avoided, just because it is pain;
and so the wise man will employ a principle of compensation, and will
avoid pleasure if it will produce a greater pain and will endure pain if it
produces a greater pleasure; and that all pleasing feelings are to be referred
to the mind, although they are actually judged by bodily senses. 96. As
a result the body is pleased for only so long as it perceives a present
pleasure, while the mind perceives a present pleasure just as much as
the body does, but also foresees a pleasure which is coming in the future
and does not let a past pleasure slip from its grasp. So the wise man will
always have a continuous and interconnected [set of] pleasures, since the
expectation of hoped-for pleasures is linked to the memory of pleasures
already perceived.

On Goals 1.65-70                                                       [1-26]
   65. There remains a topic which is especially important for our present
debate, that is friendship. You [the critics] claim that if pleasure is the
greatest good there will be no friendship at all. Epicurus indeed says this
on the topic: 26 that of all the things which wisdom has contrived which
contribute to a blessed life none is more important, more fruitful, or more
pleasing than friendship. And he proved this not just in his discourse, but
much more clearly by his life and deeds and character. The fictitious
tales told by the ancients make it clear how important it is; but in all
those stories, so many and so varied and drawn from the most remote


26. Principal Doctrine XXVII.
62                                                              /-26 to /-27

periods of antiquity, you could hardly find three pairs of [true] friends,
starting with Theseus and finishing up with Orestes. But in just one
household-and a small one at that-Epicurus assembled such large
congregations of friends which were bound together by a shared feeling
of the deepest love. And even now the Epicureans do the same thing.
   But let us get back to the point; we do not need to speak of individuals.
66. I see that the question of friendship has been dealt with in three
ways by our school. Some say that our friends' pleasures are not in
themselves as worthy of pursuit as are our own (a doctrine which some
think undermines the stability of a friendship), but nevertheless they do
defend this claim and easily, as I think, get themselves out of their
difficulties. Just as we said about the virtues somewhat earlier, so for
friendship: they deny that it can be separated from pleasure. For since
a solitary life without friends is full of dangerous traps and fear, reason
herself advises us to get some friends; and when we do so our mind is
reassured and becomes indissolubly linked to the expectation that plea-
sures will thereby be acquired. 67. And just as hatred, envy, and contempt
are inimical to pleasures, so friendships are not only the most trustworthy
supports for our pleasures, but they also produce them, as much for our
friends as for ourselves. We enjoy friends not only while they are present
with us, but we are also elated by our expectations for the immediate
and for the more distant future. Because we cannot possibly secure a
stable and long-lasting pleasantness in our life without friendship, and
cannot maintain friendship itself unless we cherish our friends just as
much as we do ourselves, it follows both that this kind of thing does
occur in friendship and that friendship is linked with pleasure. For we
rejoice at our friends' joys just as much as at our own, and grieve just
as much for their anguish. 68. That is why a wise man will have the
same feelings for his friend as for himself and will undertake the same
labours for the sake of a friend's pleasure as he would undertake for the
sake of his own.
   What we said about the way the virtues are always found to be essen-
tially connected to pleasures must also be said about friendship. For
Epicurus made a splendid declaration, in almost exactly these words: 27
One and the same doctrine has reassured our minds that there is no
eternal or even long-lasting bad thing to fear and has also seen that
in this present span of life the most reliable source of protection lies
in friendship.
   69. There are, however, some Epicureans who are more timid in the
face of your abusive criticisms, but are nevertheless pretty sharp-witted;

27. Principal Doctrine XXVIII.
The Testimony of Lucretius                                                63

they are afraid that if we believe that friendship is to be pursued for the
sake of our own pleasure, all of friendship might seem to be crippled.
So they say that people first meet, pair up, and desire to form associations
for the sake of pleasure, but that when increasing experience [of each
other] has produced the sense of a personal bond, then love flowers to
such a degree that even if there is no utility to be gained from the
friendship the friends themselves are still loved for their own sake. Indeed,
if we typically come to love certain locations, temples, cities, gymnasia,
playing fields, dogs, horses, public games (whether with gladiators or
animals) just because of familiarity, how much easier and more fitting is
it for this to happen in the case of human familiarity?
   70. There are also those who say that there is a kind of agreement
between wise men, to the effect that they will not cherish their friends
less than themselves. We know that this can happen, and that it often
does happen; and it is obvious that nothing can be discovered which
would be more effective for the production of a pleasant life than this
sort of association.
   From all of these considerations one can draw the conclusion that not
only is the case of friendship not undermined if the highest good is
located in pleasure, but also that without this no firm basis for friendship
could possibly be discovered.


The Testimony of Lucretius
   The Epicurean Lucretius (first century B.c.) wrote an epic poem On
the Nature of Things in six books. It should be read in its entirety as
crucial evidence for Epicureanism. But two extracts are of particular
importance and so are included here.

On the Nature of Things: 4.469-499                                    [1-27]

   Moreover, if someone thinks that he knows nothing, he also does not
know whether this can be known, since he admits that he knows nothing.
So I shall not bother to argue with him, since he is standing on his head
already. But nevertheless, conceding that he does know this, I would also
ask the following question: since he has never before seen anything true
in the world, how does he know what it is to know and what it is not
to know? What could have created the conceptions of truth and falsity,
and what could have proven that the doubtful is distinct from what is
certain? You will discover that the conception of truth was originally
created by the senses, and that the senses cannot be refuted. For one
64                                                                 /-27 to /-28

must find something with greater authority which could all on its own
refute what is false by means of what is true. But what should be given
greater authority than the senses? Will reason, which derives from a
false sense-perception, be able to contradict them, when it is completely
derived from the senses? And if they are not true, all of reason becomes
false as well. Will the ears be able to criticize the eyes, or the eyes the
touch? Furthermore, will the taste organs of the mouth quarrel with the
touch, or will the nose confute it, or the eyes disprove it? In my view,
this is not so. For each sense has been allotted its own separate jurisdiction,
its own distinct power. And so it is necessary that we separately perceive
what is soft and cold or hot and separately perceive the various colours
and see the features which accompany colour. Similarly the mouth's taste
is separate, and odours come to be separately, and sounds too are separate.
And so it is necessary that one set of senses not be able to refute another.
Nor, moreover, will they be able to criticize themselves, since they will
at all times have to command equal confidence.

On the Nature of Things: 2.216-293 excerpts                             [1-28]

   216. On this topic I want you to learn this too, that when the atoms
move straight down through the void by their own weight, they deflect
a bit in space at a quite uncertain time and in uncertain places, just
enough that you could say that their motion had changed. But if they
were not in the habit of swerving, they would all fall straight down
through the depths of the void, like drops of rain, and no collision would
occur, nor would any blow be produced among the atoms. In that case,
nature would never have produced anything.
   225. And if by chance someone thinks that heavier atoms, in virtue
of their more rapid motion straight through the void, could fall from
above on the lighter atoms, and that in this way the blows which generate
the productive motions could be produced, he has strayed very far from
the true account. For everything which falls through water or light air
must fall at a speed proportional to their weights, simply because the
bulk of the water and the fine nature of the air can hardly delay each
thing equally, but yield more quickly to the heavier bodies, being over-
whelmed by them. But by contrast, at no time and in no place can the
empty void resist any thing, but it must, as its nature demands, go on
yielding to it. Therefore, everything must move at equal speed through
the inactive void, though they are not driven by equal weights. Therefore,
heavier atoms can never fall upon lighter atoms from above, nor can they
by themselves generate blows which will produce change in the motions
through which nature produces things. Again and again, that is why it



The Polemic of Plutarch                                                                65

is necessary that the atoms swerve slightly-but not more than the
minimum; otherwise, we would seem to be inventing oblique motions
and then the plain facts would refute us. For we see this obviously and
apparently, that heavy bodies, insofar as they are heavy bodies, cannot
move obliquely, when they fall from above, at least not enough that you
could observe it. But who could claim to perceive that none of them
swerves at all from a perfectly straight path?
   251. Finally, if every motion is always linked to another, and new
motions always arise from the old in definite order, and the atoms do
not produce by swerving a starting point for motion which can break
the bonds of fate and prevent one cause from following another from
infinity, where does this free will which living things throughout the
world have, where, I say, does this will torn from the grasp of the fates
come from? Through this we all go where each one's pleasure28 leads
and swerve from our paths at undetermined times and places, just as our
minds incline to do. For it is far from doubtful that everyone's own will
provides the starting point for these things and that this is the source of
motion in our limbs ....
   284. That is why it is necessary to admit the same thing for the
atoms, namely, that there is another cause of motion besides blows [from
collisions] and weight, which is the source of our inborn capability [to
act freely], since we see that nothing can come from nothing. For the
weight of the atoms prevents it from being the case that everything
happens as a result of the blows [of collisions], which are like an external
force. But that the mind itself does not have an internal necessity in all
its actions, and that it is not forced, as though in chains, to suffer and
endure, that is what this tiny swerve of the atoms, occurring at no fixed
time or place, accomplishes.



The Polemic of Plutarch
   The later Platonist Plutarch (first to second century A.D.) wrote a
polemical treatise Against Colotes which contains a wide range of useful
information about Epicureanism, as one might expect in a sustained
criticism of one of Epicurus' early followers. What follow are excerpts
dealing in particular with epistemology and physics.


28. 'Will' just above and 'pleasure' here appear in the opposite order in the manuscripts.
We follow most editors in reversing them, although some editors defend the transmitted
text. In Latin, the two words differ by one letter.
66                                                                       /-29

Plutarch Against Colotes 1109a-1121e,                                  [1-29]
excerpts

   (1109a) ... Anyway, he [Colotes] who even held that nothing is any
more like this than like that, is using Epicurus' doctrine that all presenta-
tions received through the senses are true. (1109b) For if when two
people speak and one person says that the wine is dry and the other says
that it is sweet, and neither is wrong about his sense-perception, how
can the wine be dry rather than sweet? And again, you can see that some
people treat a bath as though it were hot and that others treat the same
bath as though it were cold. For some ask for cold water to be poured
in and others ask for hot. They say that a lady from Sparta came to see
Berenike, the wife of Deiotaurus, and when they got close to each other
they both turned away, the one nauseated by the [smell of] perfume, the
other by the [smell of] butter. So if the one sense-perception is no more
true than the other, it is likely both that the water is no more cold than
hot and (1109c) that the perfume and the butter are no more sweet-
smelling than foul-smelling. For if someone says that the same object of
presentation is different for different people, he has missed the fact that
he is saying that [the object] is both [at once].
   And the much discussed symmetries and harmonies of the pores in
the sense organs and the compound mixtures of seeds which they say
produce different sense-perceptions of quality in different people by
being distributed in all flavours and odours and colours, do these not
immediately force things into being 'no more [this than that]' for them?
For they reassure those who think that sense-perception deceives on the
grounds that they see the same things having opposite effects on per-
ceivers, and instruct them [as follows]: (1109d) since everything is com-
bined and blended together and since different things are designed by
nature to fit into different [pores], it is not possible for everyone to touch
and grasp the same quality; nor does the object [of sense-perception]
affect everyone the same way with all of its parts, but all of them only
experience those parts [of an object] with which their sense-organs are
symmetrical; so they are wrong to quarrel about whether the object is
good or bad or white or not white, supposing that they are supporting
their own sense-perceptions by undermining those of other people; but
one must not quarrel with even one sense-perception, since all sense-
perceptions make contact with something, (1109e) each drawing what is
compatible and suitable to itself from the compound mixture as though
from a spring; and must not assert [things] about the whole when one
is in contact with [mere] parts, nor think that everyone has the same
The Polemic of Plutarch                                                  67

experience, but that different people have different experiences according
to the differing qualities and powers of it.
   So is it time to consider which men do more to inflict 'no more [this
than that]' on things than those who proclaim that every sensible object
is a blend of all sorts of qualities-'mixed like new wine in the filter' 29-
and who agree that their canons [of truth] would perish and their criterion
would completely vanish if they left any object of perception whatsoever
pure [and simple] and they did not leave each and every one of them
a plurality?
   Notice, then, what Epicurus has had Polyaenus (in the Symposium)
say to him about the heating power of wine. (1109f) For when he said,
"Epicurus, do you deny that there are heating properties in wine?" he
answered, "What need is there to show that wine has heating properties?"
And a bit further on: "For wine seems in general not to have heating
properties, but a given quantity could be said to have a heating effect
on this individual person."
   And again, suggesting the cause [for this], he attributed it to (lllOa)
compactions and dispersions of atoms and to commixtures of and linkages
with other atoms in the mixture of wine with the body; and then he
adds: "that is why one must not say that wine has heating properties in
general, but that a given quantity has a heating effect on a nature of this
type which is in this sort of condition, or that a given amount could have a
cooling effect on this [other] nature. For in such an aggregate [as wine]
there are also the sort of natures from which coolness might be produced,
or which being linked appropriately with other natures, would produce the
nature of coolness. Hence, people are deceived, some into saying that wine
in general has cooling properties, others that it has heating properties."
   But he who says that the majority are deceived when they suppose
that what heats things has heating properties, or that what cools things
has cooling properties, is himself deceived, (lllOb) unless he believes
that it follows from what he says that each thing is no more like this
than like that. And he adds that wine often does not enter the body with
heating or cooling properties, but that when the mass has been set in
motion and the rearrangement of bodies has occurred, sometimes the
atoms which produce heat assemble in one place and by their numbers
produce heat and fever in the body, and sometimes they are expelled
and [so] chill it.
   It is obvious that these arguments can be used against everything which
is generally said or believed to be bitter, sweet, purgative, soporific, or

29. A fragment from an unknown Greek tragedy, 420 Nauck.
68                                                                     /-29

bright, on the grounds that nothing (lllOc) has its own independent
quality or power when it is in bodies, nor is it active rather than passive,
but rather takes on different features and mixtures in various bodies.
   For Epicurus himself, in book two of his Against Theophrastus, says
that colours are not natural properties of bodies, but are produced by
certain orderings and positions [of the atoms] relative to our vision; yet
he says that, by this argument, body is no more colourless than it is
coloured. And earlier he had written this, word for word: "but even
without this part [of my theory] I do not know how one can say that
those things which are in the dark have colour. And yet, when there is
a dark cloud of air [i.e., fog] evenly wrapped around things, (lllOd) it
is often the case that some men perceive differences in colours while
others do not because of the dullness of their vision; again, when we go
into a dark house we do not see colours, but after we have stayed for a
while we do." Therefore, no body will be said to have colour rather than
not to have it.
   And if colour is relative, so too will white and blue be relative, and if
these, so too sweet and bitter; consequently it will be true to predicate
of every quality that it no more exists than does not exist: for the object
will be like this for people in one condition, but not for those who are
not. (lllOe) So Colotes ends up pouring over himself and his master
the very mud and confusion in which he says those people wallow who
assert that things are 'no more this than that'.
   So is this the only place where this fine fellow shows that he "teems
with sores though he tries to heal others"? 30 Not at all. In his second
accusation [Colotes] fails even more miserably to notice how he drives
Epicurus, along with Democritus, outside the pale of normal life. For
he claims that Democritus' dicta, "colour is by convention and sweet is
by convention" and compounds are by convention and so forth, but "in
truth there are void and atoms," are opposed to sense perception; and
that anyone who clings to and uses this theory could not even think of
himself as human or as alive.
   I have no criticism to make of this argument, and I claim that these
[Democritean] views are as inseparable from Epicurus' opinions as they
themselves say the shape and weight are from the atom. For what does
Democritus say? that substances infinite in number, indivisible and inde-
structible and, moreover, qualitiless and impassible, are scattered about
and move in the void; (lllla) and when they approach one another or
collide or get tangled up with each other they appear, because they are

30. Euripides fr. 1086 Nauck.
The Polemic of Plutarch                                                   69
aggregated, as water, fire, a plant, or a man; and that everything is what
he calls atomic 'forms' and is nothing else. For there is no coming-into-
being from what-is-not, and from what-is nothing could come to be since
atoms can neither suffer nor change due to their solidity. Hence colour
does not exist, [for it would have to be] made up of colourless things,
nor do nature and soul exist, [for they would have to be] made up of
qualitiless and impassive things.
   So Democritus is to be criticized not for conceding what follows from
his principles, but for assuming principles from which these conclusions
follow. (llllb) For he ought not to have posited that the primary entities
were unchangeable, but having made this postulate he ought to have seen
that he has eliminated the genesis of all qualities. The most brazen
position of all is to see the absurdity and to deny it. So Epicurus makes
the most brazen claim, saying that he posits the same principles but does
not say that "colour is by convention" and [so too] sweet and bitter and
the qualities. If "does not say" means "does not admit," then he is up
to his old tricks. For while destroying divine providence he says that he
leaves piety intact, and while choosing friendship for the sake of pleasure
he says that he would suffer the greatest pains for the sake of his friends,
and he says that he postulates that the totality is unlimited but that he
does not eliminate up and down. This sort of behaviour is not right even
when one is joking over a drink: (llllc) to take a cup and drink as much
as one wants and then to give back what is left. In argument one must
recall this wise maxim: the beginnings may not be necessitated, but the
consequences are. So it was not necessary to postulate-or rather to steal
[the doctrine] from Democritus-that the principles of the universe are
atoms; but when once he postulated the doctrine and prided himself on
its superficial plausibility, then he ought to have drained its difficulties
to the last drop too, or showed us how bodies which have no qualities
produced most varied qualities just by coming together in a compound.
For example, where did you get what is called hot and how did it come
to be an attribute of your atoms, (lllld) which neither came [into
the compound] already having heat, nor did they become hot by their
conjunction? For the former is characteristic of something which has a
quality, and the latter of something which is naturally prone to be affected;
but you say that neither of these is appropriate for your atoms because
they are indestructible .
   . . . (1112e) ... When Epicurus says, "the nature of existing things is
bodies and place," should we interpret him as meaning that nature is
something distinct from and in addition to the existing things, (1112)
or as referring just to the existent things and to nothing else? just as, for
70                                                                        /-29

instance, he is in the habit of calling the void itself 'the nature of void'
and, by Zeus, the totality [of things] the 'nature of the totality' .
    . . . ( 1114a) Yet by saying that the totality is one he somehow prevented
us from living. For when Epicurus says that the totality is unlimited
and ungenerated and indestructible and neither grows nor shrinks, he
discourses about the totality as though it were some one thing. In the
beginning of his treatise [On Nature] he suggests that the nature of
existing things is bodies and void, and though it is one nature, he yet
divided it into two. One of these is really nothing, but you call it intangible
and void and incorporeal.
    ... (1118d) ... For if, as they think, a man is the product of both, a
body of this sort and a soul, then he who investigates the nature of soul
is investigating the nature of man by way of its more important principle.
And let us not learn from Socrates, that sophistical boaster, that the soul
is hard to understand by reason and ungraspable by sense-perception,
but rather let us learn it from these wise men who get only as far as the
corporeal powers of the soul, by virtue of which it provides the body
with warmth and softness and tension, (1118e) when they cobble together
its substance out of something hot and something breathlike and some-
thing airy, and they do not get to the most important part, but give up.
For that in virtue of which it judges and remembers and loves and hates
and in general the intelligent and reasoning part, this they say comes to
be from a kind of 'nameless' quality .
     . . (1119) ... Who makes worse mistakes in dialectic than you [Epicu-
reans], who completely abolish the class of things said [lekta], which give
substance to discourse and leave only [mere] utterances and the external
things, saying that the intermediate class of 'signified things' (by means
of which learning, (1120a) teaching, basic grasps, conceptions, impulses,
and assents all occur) does not exist at all?
    ... (1121a) For he [i.e., Colotes] is satisfied with and welcomes argu-
ments when they are used in Epicurus' writings, but does not understand
or recognize them when they are used by others. For those who say that
when a round image strikes us, or another which is bent, the sense
receives a true imprint, and who do not allow the further claim that the
tower is round and that the oar is bent-these men affirm their own
experiences and impressions but are unwilling to agree that external
objects are like this. But just as that group must refer to 'being affected
horsewise or wallwise' but not to a horse or a wall, (1121b) in the same
way they must say that the visual organ is 'affected roundly or anglewise'
but not that the oar is bent or that the tower is round. For the image
by which the visual organ is affected is bent, but the oar from which the
The Polemic of Plutarch                                                  71

image came is not bent. So since the [internal] experience is different
from the external object, either our conviction must limit itself to the
experience or, if it makes the further claim that 'it is' in addition to 'it
appears', it must be refuted. And their vociferous and indignant claim
about sense-perception, that it does not say that the external object is
warm but that the experience in [the perception] is like that-(1121c)
is this not the same as what is said about taste, viz. that he denies that
the external object is sweet but says that an experience and motion in
the [organ of] taste is of this character? And he who says that he receives
a presentation in the shape of a man, but that he does not perceive
whether there is a man, now where did he get the inspiration [for such
an idea]? Was it not from those who say that they receive a curved
presentation, but that the visual organ does not make the additional
pronouncement that it is curved, nor even that it is round, but that a
certain round impression and imprint has occurred in it?
    'Yes, by Zeus,' someone will say, 'but when I approach the tower and
when I take hold of the oar, I will pronounce the one to be straight and
the other to be polygonal, but the other [philosopher] will agree to
seeming and appearance, but nothing more, even if he does get close [to
the object].' Yes, by Zeus, (1121d) because, dear sir, he [Epicurus] sees
what follows [from his position] better than you do, and he sticks with
it: viz. that every presentation on its own account is equally trustworthy
and that no presentation is preferable to another, but that all are of equal
value. But you are giving up the principle that all [perceptions] are true
and that none is unreliable or false if you think that based on these one
ought to further pronounce regarding external objects, but did not trust
them for anything beyond the experience itself. For if they are equally
trustworthy when they appear close up and when they are distant, either
it is right to allow judgement to pronounce further, based on all of them
or not to allow this for even these. But if there is a difference in the
experience according as we are standing at a distance or close by, then
it is false to say that one presentation or sense-perception (1121e) is not
clearer than another; similarly, the testimony for and testimony against
about which they speak have nothing to do with sense-perception, but
rather with opinion. So, if they urge us to follow these and to pronounce
on external objects, they make opinion judge what is the case and make
sense-perception experience the appearances, and they transfer the decid-
ing power from what is in all circumstances true to what is often mistaken.
72                                                              /-30 to /-34


Short Fragments and
Testimonia from Known Works
From On Nature
See 1-29, 1114a and 1112ef above.

Sextus M 9.333 (75 U)                                                [1-30]
   Epicurus was in the habit of calling the nature of bodies and of the
void [the] universe and [the] totality indifferently. For at one point he
says, "The nature of the universe is bodies and void."

Vatican Scholiast on Dionysius Thrax,                                [1-31]
Grammatici Graeci 1.3, p. 116.7-12
(Hilgard) (92 U)
   And although Epicurus always made use of general outlines [of the
senses of words], he showed that definitions are more worthy of respect
by using definitions instead of general outlines in the treatise on physics;
for he used definitions when he divided the totality into the atomic and
the void, saying that "the atomic is a solid body which has no share of
void included in it; <and> void is an intangible nature", i.e., not subject
to touch.

From books 12 and 13 of On Nature                                    [1-32]
(Arrighetti 27 and 28, 84, 87, 88 U =
Philodemus On Piety)
   And in book 12 of the On Nature he says that the first men got
conceptions of indestructible natures ....
   As in book 12 he also criticizes Prodicus and Diagoras and Critias and
others, saying that they are madmen and lunatics, and he compares them
to bacchic revellers ....
   In book 13 [he mentions] the congeniality which god feels for some
and the alienation [for others].

From book 32. An unknown author.                                     [1-33]
Arrighetti 32.
   In book 32 he offers a brief and summary definition of what was
explained at great length elsewhere: "For," he says, "the soul could be
said to be a certain nature."
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Known Works                                          73

From book 25. 31                                                                    [1-34]
   From the very beginning we have seeds which lead us, some to these
things, some to those things, and some to both; they are always [the
seeds of] actions, and thoughts and dispositions, and are greater or fewer
in number. Consequently, what we develop-such or such [actions,
thoughts, and dispositions]-is, right from the first, quite simply a result
of us; and the influences which by necessity flow from the environment
through our passages are at some point up to us and to the opinions
which come from within us ... [here there is a long lacuna].
   ... the natural imprint similarly to the empty pores ... of the same
peculiarities ... in every case [lacuna of about 12 words] of which the
experiences do not cease to occur ... to admonish and quarrel with each
other and try to change each other's character, as though they had in
themselves the responsibility for [their characters] and [such responsibil-
ity lay] not just in the original [condition of] the compound, and in the
necessity which comes mechanically from the environment and the influx
[of atoms]. For if one were to attribute to admonishing and being admon-
ished the mechanical necessity of what always on any occasion [happens
to] affect oneself, one would never in this way come to an understanding
[lacuna of a few words] by blaming or praising.
   But if one were to do this, one would be leaving the very action which,
being in our power, creates the basic grasp of responsibility, and thereby
in some respect having changed his doctrine [long lacuna, of 45 or 50
words] of such error. For this sort of argument is upside-down and can
never prove that all things are like what are called 'necessitated events'.
But he quarrels about this very topic on the assumption that his opponent
is responsible for being foolish. And if he [goes on] indefinitely saying
again [and again], always on the basis of arguments, that he does this by
necessity, he is not reasoning it out [properly] as long as he attributes
to himself responsibility for reasoning well and to his opponent responsi-
bility for reasoning badly. But if he were not to stop [attributing responsi-
bility] for what he does to himself and [rather] to assign it to necessity,
he would not ... [lacuna of about 30 words]
   [But] if he is only changing the word when he refers to what we call
"through our own [agency]" by the name of necessity and will not show
that it is in virtue of a basic grasp of a sort which produces deficient
outlines that we talk about responsibility through our own [agency], he

31. Formerly thought to be from book 35. This discussion on determinism should be
compared with the discussions of the swerve above. We translate the text prepared by
David Sedley and published in his article 'Epicurus' Refutation of Determinism' in Syzetesis
(Naples 1983) 11-51.
74                                                               /-34 to /-38

would neither [lacuna of about 25 words] to occur, but to call even
necessity empty, from what you people say. And if someone does not
say this and has no auxiliary [cause] in us and no inclination to dissuade
us from things which we do, while calling the responsibility for them
'through our own agency', but giving everything which we now assert
that we do while naming the responsibility for it as being 'through our
own agency' the name of 'foolish necessity', then he will merely be
altering the name. And he will not change any of our actions, in the way
in which in some cases he who sees what sort of things are necessitated
usually dissuades those who are eager to act in defiance of force. And
the intellect will endeavour to find out which sort of thing one is to think
an action is, which we do somehow from within ourselves, but which
we are not eager to do.
   For he has no choice but to say that what sort [of action] is necessitated
[and what not] [lacuna of about 40 words] ... among the most senseless.
If someone does not forcibly insist on this or again set out what he is
refuting and what he is introducing, only the wording is changed, as I
have been going on about for a while now.
   But those who first gave a sufficient causal account and were not only
superior to their predecessors but also many times over superior to their
successors, failed to notice-despite the fact that they removed serious
difficulties in many areas-that they gave causal accounts for everything
by referring to necessity and mechanistic explanation. And the very
argument which explains this doctrine disintegrated, and the fellow did
not notice that it brought his actions into conflict with his opinions; and
that if a kind of distraction did not possess him while he acted, he would
be constantly disturbing himself; and that insofar as his opinion held
sway, he got into the worst sort of problems, but insofar as it did not
hold sway he was filled with internal strife because of the contradiction
between his actions and his opinion ....



From the Puzzles
Plutarch Against Colotes 1127d (18 U,                                 [I-35]
12 [1] A)
  ... For in the Puzzles Epicurus asks himself whether the wise man
will do some things which the laws forbid, if he knows that he will escape
detection. And he answers: "the plain statement [of the answer] is not
easy", i.e., I will do it but I do not wish to admit it.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Known Works                          75

From On the Goal
Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1089d (68 U,                                 [I-36]
22 [3] A)
   ... "For the stable condition (katastema) of the flesh and the reliable
expectation concerning this contains the highest and most secure joy, for
those who are able to reason it out."

Athenaeus Deipnosophists 12, 546ef (67 U,                             [I-37]
22 [1, 4] A)
   Not only Aristippus and his followers, but also Epicurus and his
welcomed kinetic pleasure; and I will mention what follows, to avoid
speaking of the "storms" [of passion] and the "delicacies" which Epicurus
often cites, and the "titillations" and the "stimuli" which he mentions
in his On the Goal. For he says: "For I at least do not even know what
I should conceive the good to be, if I eliminate the pleasures of taste,
and eliminate the pleasures of sex, and eliminate the pleasures oflistening,
and eliminate the pleasant motions caused in our vision by a visible form."
   ... And in his On the Goal he again [says]: "One must honour the
noble, and the virtues and things like that, ifthey produce pleasure. But
if they do not, one must bid them goodbye."


From the Symposium:
See I-29, 1109e-1110b above.


From Against Theophrastus:
See I-29, lllOcd above.


Fragments of Epicurus' Letters
Plutarch On Living the Inconspicuous Life                             [I-38]
1128f-1129a (106-7 U, 98 A)
   (1128) Moreover, if you advise good men to be inconspicuous and to
be unknown ... give yourself [Epicurus] the same advice first. Don't
write to your friends in Asia, don't address the visitors from Egypt,
(1129a) don't keep watch over the youths in Lampsacus, don't send
76                                                                        /-38 to /-47

books to all, male and female alike, showing off your wisdom, and don't
give written instructions for your burial.

Plutarch Against Colotes 1117a (116 U, 42 A)                                    [1-39]
  (1117a) ... In the letter to Anaxarchus he wrote as follows: "I summon
you to constant pleasures, and not to virtues, which provide [only] empty,
pointless, and disturbing expectations of rewards."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life llOlab (120 U)                                         [1-40]

   (llOla) ... They argue with those who eliminate pains and tears and
lamentations for the deaths of friends, and they say that the kind of
freedom from pain which amounts to insensitivity32 is the result of another
and greater bad thing, savagery or an unadulterated lust for fame and
madness, and that this is the reason why it is better to suffer something
and experience pain, and by Zeus even to weep copiously, swoon and
[experience] all the sentiment which they indulge in and [even] write
about, and so come to seem tender and given to friendship. (llOlb) For
Epicurus said this in lots of other places and he also [said it] about the
death ofHegesianax when he wrote to his father Dositheus and to Pyrson,
the brother of the deceased. For recently I chanced to go through his
letters.

Letter to Idomeneus: Diogenes Laertius 10.22                                    [1-41]
(138 U, 52 A)
   "I write this to you while experiencing a blessedly happy day, and at
the same time the last day of my life. Urinary blockages and dysenteric
discomforts afflict me which could not be surpassed for their intensity.
But against all these things are ranged the joy in my soul produced by
the recollection of the discussions we have had. Please take care of the
children of Metrodorus in a manner worthy of the good disposition you
have had since adolescence towards me and towards philosophy."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 22.5-6 (133 U, 56 A)                                   [1-42]

   Read ... the letter of Epicurus which is entitled "To Idomeneus"; he
requests Idomeneus that he flee and hurry as much as he can, before
some greater force has a chance to intervene and take away his freedom
to 'retreat'. 6. The same man also adds that nothing should be undertaken
except when it can be undertaken fittingly and on a good occasion. But

32. The term used is apathes, the Stoic word for freedom from destructive passions.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Known Works                          77
when that long-awaited moment comes, he says one must make one's
exit. He instructs the man considering escape not to be negligent, and
expresses the hope that there is a salutary escape, even from the most
difficult situations, providing we neither hasten before the right time nor
hold back when the time has come.


Plutarch Against Colotes 1127de (134 U)                               [I-43]

   (1127d) Again, I think, in writing to Idomeneus he urges him not to
live as a slave to laws and opinions, as long as they do not occasion
troubles caused by a blow from one's neighbour. So if those who abolish
laws and political institutions abolish human life, (1127de) then this is
what Epicurus and Metrodorus do; for they urge their adherents to avoid
public life and express disgust for those who participate in it, abusing
the earliest and wisest lawgivers and urging contempt for the laws, provid-
ing there is no fear of beatings and punishment.


A Deathbed Letter (from Philodemus,                                   [I-44]
Pragmateiai 31 Diano; 177 U, 78 A)
  "As I write this, it is the seventh day that I have been unable to urinate
and have had pains of the kind which lead to death. So, if anything
should happen, take care of Metrodorus' children for four or five years,
spending no more on them than you now spend on me in a year."


Stobaeus Anthology 3.17.23 (vol. 3 p. 495                             [I-45]
W-H; 135 U, 53 A)
   "If you wish to make Pythocles wealthy, do not give him more money;
rather, reduce his desires."


Plutarch Against Colotes 1117e (130 U, 54 A)                          [I-46]

  "So send us some offerings for the care of our sacred body, on your
own behalf and that of the children. For so it occurs to me to say to you."


Seneca Letters on Ethics 21.3 (132 U, 55 A)                           [I-47]

   "If you are affected by glory, my letters will make you more famous
than all those things which you cherish and because of which you are cher-
ished."
78                                                               /-48 to I-59

Stobaeus Anthology 3.17.13 (vol. 3 p. 492                             [1-48]
W-H; 135a U, 58 A)
   "We have been keen for self-sufficiency, not so that we should employ
inexpensive and plain fare under all circumstances, but so that we can
be of good cheer about them."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 18.9 (158 U, 83 A)                           [1-49]

   ... He certainly says this in the letter which he wrote to Polyaenus
in the archonship of Charinus; and indeed he boasts that he could be
fed for less than an obol, but that Metrodorus, because he had not yet
made so much [moral] progress, required an entire obol.

Athenaeus Deipnosophists 13, 588ab (117 U,                            [1-50]
43 A)
  "I congratulate you, sir, because you have come to philosophy free of
any taint of culture."

Diogenes Laertius 10.6 (163 U, 89 A)                                  [1-51]

   And in his letter to Pythocles, 33 he writes, "0 blessed one, spread your
sails and flee all forms of culture."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1097cd (183 U, 99 A)                         [I-52]
  (1097c) ... when [Epicurus] wrote to his friends, "you took care of
us in a godlike and magnificent fashion as regards the provision of food,
and (1097d) you have given proofs which reach to heaven of your good
will towards me."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 9.1 (174 U)                                  [1-53]

   You want to know whether Epicurus is right to criticize, as he does
in one letter, those who say that a wise man is self-sufficient and so does
not need a friend. Epicurus makes this objection against Stilpo and those
[i.e., the Stoics] who held that the highest good is a soul free of passions.

Seneca Letters on Ethics 9.8 (175 U)                                  [1-54]

   ... Although a wise man is self-sufficient, he will still want to have
a friend, if for no other reason, in order to exercise his friendship, so

33. Not the same letter translated above.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Known Works                         79

that so great a virtue might not go to waste; not for the reason which
Epicurus gave in this very letter, so that he might have someone to attend
to him when sick, and to help him when he is thrown into prison or is
impoverished, but so that he might have someone whom he might himself
attend when that person is sick and whom he might free from imprison-
ment by his enemies.


Philodemus On Piety 126 Gomperz (387 U,                             [I-55]
114 A)
   Again: "let us sacrifice to the gods," he says, "piously and well, as is
appropriate, and let us do everything well according to the laws, but [let
us do so] not disturbing them at all with our opinions on the topic of
those who are best and most majestic; again, we say that it is even right
[to do this] on the basis of the opinion which I was discussing. For in
this way, by Zeus, it is possible for a mortal nature to live like Zeus, as
it appears."


Philodemus On Piety 105 Gomperz (157 U,                             [I-56]
86 A)
  Moreover, in his letter to Polyaenus he says that one should join in
the celebration of the festival of the Anthesteria. For one must remember
the gods as being the causes of many good things.


Philodemus On Piety 125 Gomperz (116 A)                             [I-57]

  " ... for the others, and I asked them to display benevolence to other
men at all times."


Diogenes Laertius 10.11 (182 U, 123 A)                              [I-58]

   "Send me a small measure of cheese, so that when I want to have a
feast I shall be able to do so."


Stobaeus Anthology 3.17.33 (vol. 3 p. 501                           [I-59]
W-H; 181 U, 124 A)
  "I revel in the pleasure of my poor body, employing water and bread,
and I spit upon the pleasures of extravagance, not for their own sake,
but because of the difficulties which follow from them."
80                                                              /-60 to /-68

Seneca Letters on Ethics 20.9 (206 U, 125 A)                          [I-60]
   "Your discourse will appear more impressive, believe you me, if you
are lying on a cheap bed and wearing rags. For it will not only be uttered,
then, but proven."

Porphyry To Marcella 29 (207 U, 126 A)                                [I-61]
  "It is better for you to have confidence [about the future] while lying
on a cheap bed than to be disturbed while possessing a golden couch
and an extravagant table."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 7.11 (208 U, 129 A)                          [I-62]
   "I write this for you, not for the many; for we are for each other a
sufficiently big audience."

Gnomologium Parisinum: 1168 f. 115 r. (187 U,                         [I-63]
131 A)
   "I never desired to please the many, for I did not learn the things which
please them, and what I did learn was far removed from their perception."

Didymus Caecus Commentary on Ecclesiastes                             [I-64]
24.8-11 (133 A)
   For he writes [in his letter] to Idomeneus that the wise man uses
circumstances in a way different from he who is not wise, and he adds:
"Then you were not wise, but now you have been zealous to become so.
So reflect on the quality of your former life and of your present life, [to
see] if you bore disease then as you do now or if you were in control of
wealth as you are now in control of it."
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                       81


Short Fragments and
Testimonia from
lJncertain VVorks
Logic and epistemology
Philodemus Pragmateiai 29 Diano (212 U,                               [1-65]
137 A)
   " ... bringing your letter and the reasoning which you had carried out
concerning men who could see neither the analogy which obtains between
the phenomena and the unseen [realities] nor the consistency which exists
between the senses and the unseen [realities] and again the testimony
against ... "

Seneca Letters on Ethics 89.11 (242 U)                                [1-66]

   The Epicureans held that there are two parts of philosophy, physics
and ethics; they got rid of logic. Then since they were forced by the
very facts to distinguish what was ambiguous and to refute falsities lying
hidden under the appearance of truth, they themselves also introduced
that topic which they call 'on judgement and the criterion' [i.e., canonic];
it is [just] logic by another name, but they think that it is an accessory
part of physics.

Sextus M 8.9 (244 U)                                                  [1-67]

   But Epicurus said that all sensibles were true and existing-for there
was no difference between saying that something is true and that it is
an existing object. And that is why, in giving an outline [definition] of
the true and the false, he says, "that which is such as it is said to be is
true" and "that which is not such as it is said to be is false."

Sextus M 7.203-16 (247 U)                                             [1-68]

   203. Epicurus says that there are two things which are linked to each
other, presentation and opinion, and that of these presentation, which
he also calls 'clear fact,' is always true. For just as the primary feelings,
i.e., pleasure and pain, come to be from certain productive factors and in
accordance with the productive factors themselves (for example, pleasure
comes to be from pleasant things and pain from painful things, and what
82                                                                      /-68

causes pleasure can never fail to be pleasant, nor can what produces pain
not be painful; but rather, it is necessary that what gives pleasure should
be pleasant and that what gives pain should in its nature be painful), so
[too] in the case of presentations, which are feelings in us: what causes
each of them is presented in every respect and unqualifiedly, and since
it is presented it cannot help but exist in truth just as it is presented [as
being]. ... [There is a lacuna here.] ... that it is productive of presen-
tation.
    204. And one must reason similarly for the individual [senses]. For
what is visible not only is presented as visible but also is such as it is
presented [as being]; and what is audible is not only presented as audible
but also is like that in truth; and similarly for the rest. Therefore, it
turns out that all presentations are true. And reasonably so. 205. For if,
the Epicureans say, a presentation is true if it comes from an existing
object and in accordance with the existing object, and [it] every presenta-
tion arises from the object presented (which is existent) and in accordance
with the presented object itself, [then] necessarily every presentation
is true.
    206. Some people are deceived by the difference between the presenta-
tions which seem to come from the same perceptible, for example, a visible
thing, according to which [i.e., the difference] the object is presented as
being of varying colour or varying shape or as different in some other
way. For they supposed that one of the presentations which differ and
conflict in this way must be true and the one derived from the opposites
must be false. This is foolish and the product of men who do not have
a comprehensive view of the nature of [lit. in] things.
    207. Let us make our case for visible things. For the solid object is
not seen in its entirety, but [we see only] the colour of the solid. And
of the colour some is on the solid itself, as in things seen from close by
and things seen from a moderate distance, and some lies outside the solid
and in the adjacent places, as in things observed from a great distance.
And since this [colour] changes in the intermediate [space] and takes on
its own shape it produces the sort of presentation which is just like what
it [i.e., the colour] itself is really like. 208. So, just as the sound which
is heard is not that in the bronze instrument being struck nor that in
the mouth of the man shouting, but rather is that which strikes our sense
[organ]; and as no one says that he who hears a faint voice from a distance
hears it falsely since when he comes closer he grasps it as being louder;
so I would not say that the vision speaks falsely because it sees the tower
as small and round from a distance but from close up sees it as larger
and square. 209. But rather [I would say] that [the vision] tells the truth,
since when the object of perception appears to it [as] small and of such
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                       83

a shape it is genuinely small and of such a shape (for the edges of the
images are broken off by the movement through the air), and when it
again appears big and of a different shape, again it is in a similar manner
big and has that different shape-the object being, however, now not
the same in the two cases. For it remains for distorted opinion to think
that the same object of presentation was observed from close up and
from a distance.
    210. It is a property of sense-perception to grasp only that which is
present and stimulating it, such as colour, but not to decide that the
object here and the object over there are different. So for these reasons
all presentations are true <though not all opinions are true> but have some
differences [among them]. For some of these [opinions] are true and
some are false, since they are our judgements upon presentations and
we judge some things correctly and some badly, either by adding and
attaching something to the presentations or by subtracting something
from them-in general terms, by falsifying the non-rational sense-per-
ception.
    211. Therefore, according to Epicurus, some opinions are true and
some are false; those which are testified for and those which are not
testified against by clear facts are true, while those which are testified
against and those which are not testified for by clear facts are false. 212.
'Testimony for' is a grasp, by means of clear facts, that the object of
opinion is such as it once was thought to be. For example, when Plato
is approaching from the distance I guess and opine, because of the
distance, that it is Plato; but when he approached there was further
testimony that it was Plato (since the distance was reduced) and [finally]
the clear facts themselves testified to it. 213. 'Lack of testimony against'
is the consistency of the non-evident thing which is the object of supposi-
tion and opinion with what is apparent. For example, when Epicurus
says that there is void, which is a non-evident object, he confirms this
through a clear fact, i.e., motion; for if void does not exist, then motion
ought not to exist, since the moving body would have no place to shift
into because everything [would] be full and dense; 214. consequently,
since there is motion what is apparent does not testify against the non-
evident thing which is the object of opinion. 'Testimony against', how-
ever, is something in conflict with 'lack of testimony against'. For it is
the joint elimination of what is apparent along with the supposed non-
evident thing. For example, the Stoic says that there is no void, holding
that it is something non-evident, and thus along with this supposed fact
one ought to eliminate what is apparent, by which I mean motion; for
if there is no void it follows necessarily that there is no motion, according
to the mode [of argument] which we have already indicated. 215. Similarly
84                                                                /-68 to /-77

too, 'lack of testimony for' is in opposition to 'testimony for'. For it [i.e.,
the lack of testimony for] is the evidence through clear facts that the
object of opinion is not just as it was opined to be. For example, when
someone is approaching from afar we guess, because of the distance, that
it is Plato; but when the distance is reduced we realize through clear
facts that it is not Plato. And this sort of thing turns out to be 'lack of
testimony for'. For the object of opinion was not testified for by what
was apparent. 216. Hence, testimony for and lack of testimony against
are the criterion of something's being true, while lack of testimony for
and testimony against are [the criterion of something's being] false. And
clear facts are the foundation and cornerstone of all [four of these].

Aetius 4.9.5     = Dox. Gr.      p. 396 (248 U)                         [1-69]

   Epicurus [says] that every sense-perception and every presentation is
true, but that some opinions are true and some are false.

Sextus M 8.63-64 (253 U)                                                [1-70]

   63. Epicurus said that all sensibles are true and that every presentation
comes from something existing and is of the same sort as that which
stimulates the sense-perception. He also says that those who say that
some presentations are true and some are false are led astray because
they are not able to distinguish opinion from clear fact. At least in the
case of Orestes, when he thought he saw the Furies, his sense-perception
which was stimulated by images was true (for the images did exist),
whereas his mind, in thinking that the Furies were solid [objects], held
a false opinion. 64. And further, he says, the aforementioned [philoso-
phers] who introduce a difference among presentations are not able to
convince [us] that it is the case that some of them are true and some
false. For they will not be able to instruct us in such a matter by means
of an appearance (for appearances are just what is being investigated),
nor by means of something non-evident (for that which is non-evident
has to be demonstrated by means of an appearance).

Clement of Alexandria Stromates 2.4,16.3                                [1-71]
p. 121 Stahlin (255 U)
  Indeed, Epicurus, who more than anyone prefers pleasure to truth,
supposes that a basic grasp is the [basis] of the intellect's conviction; he
defines a basic grasp as an application [of the intellect] to something clear
and to the clear conception of the thing, and [holds] that no one can
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                     85

either investigate or puzzle over, nor even hold an opinion or even refute
[someone], without a basic grasp.

Sextus M 11.21 (255 U)                                               [1-72]

   According to the wise Epicurus it is not possible to investigate or
[even] to be puzzled without a basic grasp.

Sextus M 8.258 (259 U)                                               [1-73]

   ... We see that there are some who have abolished the existence of
'things said' [lekta], not just [philosophers] from other schools, such as
the Epicureans, but even Stoics such as Basilides and his followers, who
thought that no incorporeal [entity] exists.

Sextus M 8.13 (259 U)                                                [1-74]

   But the followers of Epicurus and Strato the natural philosopher leave
[in existence] only two [such entities], the signifier and the object, and
so they appear to belong to the second group and to make the true and
the false a matter of the utterance [and not the things said, i.e., lekta].

Sextus M 8.177 (262 U)                                               [1-75]

  ... For Epicurus and the leaders of his school said that the sign was
sensible, while the Stoics said that it was intelligible.


Physics and Theology
Pseudo-Plutarch Stromates 8              = Dox. Gr.                  [1-76]
p. 581 (266 U)
  ... in the totality [of things] nothing unprecedented happens beyond
[what has happened in] the unlimited time which has already passed.

Aetius 1.3.18     = Dox.Gr.      p. 285-6 (267, 275 U)               [1-77]

   Epicurus, the son of Neocles and an Athenian, philosophized in the
manner of Democritus and said that the principles of existing things are
bodies which can be contemplated by reason, which do not participate
in void and are ungenerated and indestructible, since they can neither
be broken nor be compounded [or: arranged] out of parts, nor be altered
in their qualities. They are contemplated by reason. Anyway, they move
in the void and through the void. And the void itself is infinite, and so
86                                                                /-77 to /-87

are the bodies. Bodies have these three properties: shape, size, weight.
Democritus said that there were two, size and shape, but Epicurus added
weight to these as a third. For, he says, it is necessary that the bodies
move by the blow of [an object with] weight, since [otherwise] they will
not move. The shapes of the atoms are ungraspably many, but not
unlimited. For there are none which are hooked or trident-shaped or
ring-shaped; for these shapes are easily broken and the atoms are impassi-
ble. They have their own shapes which can be contemplated by reason.
The atom is so called not because it is the minimal [particle], but because
it cannot be divided, since it is impassible and does not participate in void.

Aetius 1.20.2       = Dox. Gr.    p. 318 (271 U)                       [1-78]

     Epicurus [says that] void, place, and space differ [only] in name.

Sextus M 8.329 (272 U)                                                 [1-79]

  ... Epicurus, for example, thinks that he has offered the most powerful
demonstration that the void exists: "If motion exists, void exists; but
motion does indeed exist; therefore void exists."

Sextus M 10.2 (271 U-addendum)                                         [1-80]

   Therefore, we must understand that according to Epicurus one part
of the nature which is termed intangible is called 'void', one part 'place',
and one part 'space'. The names vary according to different applications
[of the intellect], since the nature which is designated 'void' when it is
empty of every body is called 'place' when it is occupied by a body and
becomes 'space' when bodies pass through it. In Epicurus, however, it
is called by the general term 'intangible nature' because it is deprived of
'touch' in the sense of resistance.

Sextus M 3.98 (273* U-addendum)                                        [1-81]

   Then, as the Epicureans too say, the straight line in the void is indeed
straight, but it does not turn because even the void itself is not receptive
of motion either in whole or in part.

Sextus M 10.257 (275 U)                                                [1-82]

  ... which Epicurus too agreed with when he said that body was
conceived as an aggregate of shape and size and resistance and weight.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                     87

Simplicius Commentary on Aristotle's Physics                         [1-83]
232a23 ff. CIAG 10.938.17-22 (277 U)
   For unless every magnitude were divisible, it would not always be
possible for a slower object to move a lesser distance in an equal time
than a quicker one. For slower and quicker objects cover the atomic and
indivisible [distance] in the same time, since if [one] took more time, it
would cover in the equal time a [distance] less than the indivisible [dis-
tance]. And that is why the Epicureans too think all [bodies] move at
equal speed through indivisible [distances], so that they can avoid having
their atomic [quantities] be divided and so no longer atomic.

Aetius 1.12.5     = Dox.Gr.      p. 311 (275, 280 U)                 [1-84]

  Epicurus [says that] the primary and simple bodies are ungraspable,
and that the compounds formed from them all have weight. Atoms
sometimes move in a straight line, sometimes in a swerve, and those
which move upwards do so by collision and rebound.

Aetius 1.23.4     = Dox.Gr.      319-320 (280 U)                     [1-85]

  Epicurus says there are two kinds of motion, the straight and the
swerve.

Plutarch On the Generation of the Soul in the                        [1-86]
Timaeus 1015bc (281 U)
   ... they do not concede to Epicurus that the atom can swerve the
tiniest bit, on the grounds that he introduces a causeless motion coming
from not being.

Simplicius Commentary on Aristotle's De                              [1-87]
Caelo 275b29 CIAG 7.242.18-26(284 U)
   For they [Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus] said that the princi-
ples were unlimited in number, and they also thought that they were
atomic and indivisible and impassible, because they were dense and did
not have a share of the void; for they said that division takes place where
there is something void in bodies, and also that these atoms, being
separated from each other in the unlimited void and differing in shape
and size and position and ordering, move in the void and that they catch
up with each other and collide and that some rebound to any chance
place while others get entangled with each other, in accordance with the
88                                                            /-87 to /-90

symmetry of their shapes and sizes and positions and orderings; and in
this way it comes about that the origin of compounds is produced.

Alexander of Aphrodisias On Mixture                                 [1-88]
214.28-215.8 (290 U)
   Epicurus wanted to avoid what Democritus said followed for those
who say that blending occurs by means of the juxtaposition of the compo-
nents of the blend, and himself said that blending occurs by means of the
juxtaposition of certain bodies, though not of bodies which are themselves
mixed and [still] preserved in the division, (215) but rather of bodies
that are broken down into elements and atoms from which each of [those
bodies] is a sort of compound, one being wine, another water, another
honey, another something else; and then he says that the blend occurs
by a certain kind of reciprocal compounding of those bodies from which
the components of the blend were constituted; and it is these which
produce the blended body, not the water and the wine, but [it is] the
atoms which make up the water, as one might call them, which are
blended together with those which make up the wine by a destruction
and generation of certain [bodies]. For the breakdown of each into its
elements is a form of destruction, and the compounding produced from
the elements themselves is <a sort of genesis>.

Sextus M 10.219-227 (294 U)                                         [1-89]
   219. According to the account of Demetrius of Laconia, Epicurus says
that time is a property of properties which accompanies days and nights
and hours and feelings and absences of feeling and motions and states
of rest. For all of these are accidental properties of certain things, and
since it accompanies all of these, time would not unreasonably be called
a property of properties. 220. For in general, to go back a bit in order
to promote the comprehension of our argument, some existing things
exist in their own right while others are observed to be dependent on
things which exist in their own right. And the things which exist in their
own right are things like substances (for example, body and void), while
their so-called accidents are the things observed to be dependent on the
things which exist in their own right. 221. Of these accidents, some are
inseparable from that of which they are the accidents, and some are of
such a nature as to be separated. Those which are inseparable from that
of which they are the accidents, then, are, for example, resistance [as an
accident] of body and yielding [as an accident] of void. 222. For a body
cannot ever be thought of without resistance, nor can void be thought
of without yielding; rather, resistance is a permanent accident of the one
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                        89

and yielding of the other. Those which are not inseparable from that of
which they are the accidents are, for example, motion and rest. 223. For
compound bodies are neither in perpetual motion without opportunity
for rest, nor are they perpetually in a state of not moving; rather, they
sometimes have motion as an accident and sometimes rest. By contrast,
the atom, when it is on its own, is in perpetual motion. For [while
moving] it must either meet up with void or with a body; but if it meets
with void, it moves through it because of its yielding, and if it meets
with a body, its motion is a rebound away from it as a result of its
resistance. 224. These, then, are the properties which time accompanies,
I mean day and night and hours and feelings and absences of feeling and
motion and rest. For day and night are properties of the surrounding
air, day occurring when the sun illuminates it and night coming along
when it is deprived of the sun's light. 225. An hour is a part of either a
day or a night, and so again is a property of the air, just as day and night
are. And time is co-extensive with every day and every night and hour,
which is why night and day are said to be long or short, our reference
being to the time which is an accident of [each of] these. And the feelings
and absences of feeling are either [states of] pleasure or pain, which is
why they are not substances but rather properties of those who have a
pleasant or painful experience; but properties are not without [reference
to] time. 226. In addition, motion too and rest as well are, as we have
already established, properties of bodies and are not separable from time.
For we measure by time the speed or slowness of motion, and again the
greater or lesser extent of a period of rest. 227. But from all this it is
evident that Epicurus thinks that time is an incorporeal, though not in
the same sense as the Stoics do. For they, as we have said, posited that
time is an incorporeal which is conceived of all by itself, while Epicurus
thinks that it is an accident of certain things.

Simplicius Commentary on Aristotle's Physics                           [1-90]
203b15 CIAG 9.466, 31-467.4 (297 U)
   There is a fourth point which is hard to stare down: the fact that
everything which is limited seems to be limited by something. For if
everything which is limited is limited by something which is external to
itself, then that external thing by which it is limited is itself either
unlimited or limited. And if it is unlimited, then we immediately have
[the conclusion] that the unlimited exists. And if it is limited, for example,
the earth, then this too is limited by something else, and so on without
limit. And if it goes on without limit, the unlimited exists. For one will
never get one's hands on the final limit, if indeed this too is limited by
90                                                              /-90 to /-97

something else. The Epicureans, according to Alexander, relied on this
argument above all else when they said that the totality was unlimited,
because everything which is limited by something has outside it something
which is [in turn] limited. And Aristotle mentions this as a quite old ar-
gument.

Aetius 2.4.10     = Dox.Gr.      p. 331 (305 U)                      [1-91]
    Epicurus [says that] the cosmos is destroyed in very many ways: for
[it is destroyed] in the manner of an animal and in the manner of a plant
and in lots of [other] ways.

Aetius 1.4.1-4     = Dox.Gr.      p. 289-291 (308* U)                [1-92]
    1. So the cosmos was compounded and endowed with its rounded
[lit.: bent] shape in the following manner.
    Because the atomic bodies, which move without providence and in a
random manner, were constantly moving at the greatest of speeds, many
bodies were assembled together in the same place for this reason, and
had a variety of shapes and sizes <and weights>. 2. When they were
assembling in the same place, the larger and heavier bodies, at all events,
moved towards the bottom and settled; but the small, round, smooth,
and slippery ones were pushed out in the concourse of atoms and so
moved into the upper regions. So when the force of the blows [of atomic
collisions] stopped raising them up and the blow[s] no longer carried
them into the upper regions, but they were prevented from moving
downwards, they were squeezed into the places which were able to receive
them. And these were the places around about, and the majority of the
bodies were bent around to these places. By becoming entangled with
each other during the bending they generated the sky.
    3. Retaining the same nature and being varied, as was said, the atoms
which were pushed out to the upper regions produced the nature of the
heavenly bodies. The majority of the bodies which were evaporated
upwards struck the air and expelled it. And [the air], being made wind-
like during its movement and gathering together the heavenly bodies,
drove them around with itself and by this twisting produced their present
circular movement in the upper regions.
    And then the earth was produced from the [bodies] which settled [at
the bottom], and from those which were raised upwards the sky, fire,
and air [were produced]. 4. Since a great deal of matter was still contained
in the earth and this was packed densely by the blows of the [atomic]
bodies and by those from the rays of the heavenly bodies, [the earth's]
entire configuration, which was made up of small particles, was squeezed
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                      91

together and [so] produced the nature of fluids. And since this [nature]
was disposed to flow, it moved down into the hollow places and those
able to receive it and contain it; that, or the water all by itself hollowed
out the existing places by settling [there].
   So the most important parts of the cosmos were produced in this way.


Sextus M 7.267 (310 U)                                                [1-93]

  Epicurus and his followers thought they were able to indicate the
conception of man ostensively, saying: "man is this sort of form together
with possession of life."


Aetius 4.4.6     = Dox. Gr.     p. 390 (312 U)                        [1-94]

   Democritus and Epicurus say the soul has two parts, one which is
rational and is situated in the chest area, and the other which is non-
rational and is spread throughout the entire compound of the body.


Aetius 4.3.11     = Dox.Gr.      p. 388-389 (315 U)                   [1-95]

   Epicurus [says that the soul is] a blend of four things, a certain kind
of fiery stuff, a certain kind of airy stuff, a certain kind of breathlike
stuff and a fourth something which is nameless. (This was the power of
sense-perception for him.) Of these, the breath provides motion, the air
rest, the hot the apparent heat of the body, and the nameless element
the [power of] sense-perception in us. For sense-perception is in none
of the named elements.


Aetius 4.8.10     = Dox.Gr.      p. 395 (317 U)                       [1-96]

  Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus [say that] sense-perception and
thought occur when images approach from the outside. For we apply
neither [sense-perception nor thought] to anything in the absence of an
image striking from the outside.


Aetius 4.13.1     = Dox.Gr.      p. 403 (318 U)                       [1-97]

  Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus thought that the visual experi-
ence occurred by means of the reception of images.
92                                                           1-98 to 1-105

Alexander of Aphrodisias Commentary on                             [1-98]
Aristotle's De Sensu 438a5 ff. CIAG 3.1,
34.18-22 (319 U)
   [Democritus] himself, and before him Leucippus and after him the
Epicureans, think that certain images, which are of the same shape as
the objects from which they flow, flow from them and strike the eyes of
those who are seeing and that this is how seeing occurs. As a proof of
this he offers the fact that there is always in the pupil of those who are
seeing a reflection and image of what is seen, and this is exactly what
the act of seeing is.


Aetius 4.19.2     = Dox.Gr.     p. 408 (321 U)                     [1-99]

   Epicurus [says that] the voice is a flow sent out from those who make
utterances or produce sounds or noises. This flow is broken up into
particles of the same shape. ("Of the same shape" means that the round
are like the round and the angular and the triangular are like those of
those types.) And when these strike the organs of hearing the perception
of voice is produced.


London Scholiast on Dionysius Thrax,                              [1-100]
Grammatici Graeci 1.3, p. 482.13-19 (Hilgard)
(322 U)
    Epicurus, Democritus, and the Stoics say that voice is a body. For
everything which can act or be acted upon is a body. For example, iron:
it is acted upon by fire and acts on men or wood. So if voice can act and
be acted upon, it is a body. But it acts, since we proceed to enjoyment
when we hear a voice or a lyre; and it is acted upon, as when we are
speaking and the wind blows, which makes it harder to hear our voice.


Censorinus De Die Natali 4.9 (333 U)                              [1-101]

  Democritus of Abdera first held that men were created from water
and mud. And Epicurus' view is not much different: for he believed that
when the mud became warm, first there grew wombs of some kind or
another which clung to the earth by roots, and these sent forth infants
and then provided a natural supply of milky fluid for them, under the
guidance of nature. When these [infants] had been brought up in this
manner and reached maturity, they then propagated the human race.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                                     93

Origen Against Celsus 1.24 (334 U)                                                [1-102]
   As to this, one should also say that a deep and arcane debate about
the nature of names emerged: are names conventional, as Aristotle thinks;
or natural, as the Stoics believe (for the first utterances imitate the things
the utterances are applied to, and accordingly they introduce [them] as
elements of a kind for etymology); or are names natural, as Epicurus
teaches-in a manner different from that of the Stoics, since the first
men burst forth with certain sounds which were applied to things?

Proclus Commentary on Plato's Cratylus 16,                                        [1-103]
17 (pp. 6 and 8-9 Boissonade, 335 U)
   16. That Pythagoras and Epicurus shared the view of Cratylus, while
Democritus and Aristotle shared that of Hermogenes.
   17. That [names are] natural in four senses. For either [they are natural]
as the substances of animals and plants are (both their parts and the
wholes), or as their activities and powers are (for example, the lightness
and heat of fire), or as shadows and reflections in mirrors are, or as crafted
images which resemble their own archetypes are. Epicurus, then, thought
that names were natural in the first 34 sense, as being primary functions
of nature: as the voice and vision and as seeing and hearing [are natural],
in the same way naming [is natural]. So that names too are natural in
the sense of functions of nature. But Cratylus [says that names are natural]
in the second sense; that is why he says that each thing has its own
proper name, since it was given specifically [to that thing] by the first
name-givers in a craftsmanlike fashion based on an understanding [of
that thing]. For Epicurus said that these men [the first name-givers] did
not give names based on an understanding of things, but because they
were moved in a natural fashion, like those who cough and sneeze and
bellow and bark and lament.

Aetius 4.7.4        = Dox.Gr.         p. 393 (336 U)                              [1-104]
  Democritus and Epicurus [said that the soul] is mortal and perishes
with the body.

Sextus M 9.25 (353 U)                                                             [1-105]
  Epicurus thinks that men have derived the conception of god from
presentations [received] while asleep. For, he says, since large anthropo-

34. Usener emends this to 'second'; but from the larger context it seems clear that Proclus
rather sloppily groups the first two senses together as a new 'first sense', and is equally
sloppy in his reference to Cratylus' use of the 'second' sense.
94                                                             /-105 to /-115

morphic images strike them while they sleep they supposed that some
such anthropomorphic gods also existed in reality.

Aetius 1.7.34     = Dox.Gr.       p. 306 (355 U)                     [I-106]

   Epicurus [says that] the gods are anthropomorphic and can be contem-
plated by reason as a result of the fineness of the nature of their images.

Sextus M 9.178 (357 U)                                               [I-107]

   And again, if [the divine] exists, it is either vocal or non-vocal. Well,
to say that god is non-vocal is completely absurd and in conflict with
the common conceptions. But if [the divine] is vocal, then it uses its
voice and has speech organs, like lungs and windpipe and tongue and
mouth. But this is absurd and almost as bad as the myths told by Epicurus.

Aetius 1.7.7     = Dox.Gr.      p. 300 (361 U)                       [I-108]

  [An Epicurean speaks]: Both [Anaxagoras and Plato] share this error,
because they portrayed god as being concerned for human affairs and as
making the cosmos for the sake of man. For a blessed and indestructible
animal, overflowing with good things and free of any share of what is
bad, is completely preoccupied with the continuance of his own happiness
and indestructibility and so is not concerned with human affairs. For he
would be wretched, like a workman or builder, if he undertook burdens
and felt concern for the creation of the cosmos.

Lactantius On the Anger of God 13.20-22                              [I-109]
(374 U)
   20. And if this explanation [for the existence of bad things] ... is true,
then that argument ofEpicurus is refuted. "God," he says, "either wants
to eliminate bad things and cannot, or can but does not want to, or
neither wishes to nor can, or both wants to and can. 21. If he wants to
and cannot, then he is weak-and this does not apply to god. If he can
but does not want to, then he is spiteful-which is equally foreign to
god's nature. If he neither wants to nor can, he is both weak and spiteful
and so not a god. If he wants to and can, which is the only thing fitting
for a god, where then do bad things come from? Or why does he not
eliminate them?" 22. I know that most of the philosophers who defend
[divine] providence are commonly shaken by this argument and against
their wills are almost driven to admit that god does not care, which is
exactly what Epicurus is looking for.
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                      95

Aetius 1.29.5     = Dox.Gr.      p. 326 (375 U)                     [1-110]
  Epicurus says that all things [occur] by necessity, by choice, and
by chance.

Simplicius Commentary on Aristotle's Physics                        [1-111]
198b29 CIAG 9.371.30-372.16 (377* U)
   In cases where everything happened as though it were for the sake of
some goal, these [creatures] were preserved because, although they were
formed by chance, they were formed as suitable compounds; but in other
cases [the creatures] perished and still do perish, as Empedocles refers to
"oxlike creatures with human faces" .... The ancient natural philosophers
who said that material necessity was the cause of things which come to
be seem to hold this opinion, and among later thinkers so do the Epicure-
ans. Their error comes, as Alexander says, from thinking that everything
which comes to be for the sake of some goal comes to be by intention
and calculation and from seeing that things which come about by nature
do not come to be in this way. But this is not so.

Plutarch On Stoic Self-Contradictions 1050bc                        [1-112]
(378 U)
   (1050b) ... And yet Epicurus somehow twists about and exercises his
ingenuity (1050c) in contriving to free and liberate voluntary action from
[the necessity of] eternal motion, in order not to leave vice immune
to blame.

Aetius 1.29.6     = Dox. Gr.     p. 326 (380 U)                     [1-113]
  Epicurus [says that chance is] a cause which is unstable [or: uncertain]
with respect to persons, times, and places.

Maximus the Abbott Gnom. 14                                         [1-114]
(388 U)
   If god acted in accordance with the prayers of men, all men would
rather quickly be destroyed, since they constantly pray for many sufferings
to befall each other.


Ethics
Plutarch Against Colotes 1127a (8 U)                                [1-115]
  And when they write, they write about politics to discourage us from
practicing politics, and write about rhetoric to discourage us from practic-
96                                                              /-115 to /-129

ing rhetoric, and about kingship to discourage us from consorting with
kings.

Ammianus Marcellinus 30.4.3 (51 U)                                    [1-116]

  The rich genius of Plato defines this calling, i.e., forensic oratory, as
an image of a part of politics; but Epicurus calls it "a vile technique." ...

Seneca Letters on Ethics 8.7 (199 U)                                  [1-117]

     "You ought to be a slave to philosophy in order to achieve true liberty."

Porphyry To Marcella 30 (200 U)                                       [1-118]

  "When the flesh cries out, be assured that the [answering] cry of the
soul can be explained by natural science. The cry of the flesh: not to be
hungry, not to be thirsty, not to be cold. And while it is difficult for the
soul to prevent these things, it is dangerous to neglect nature which daily
proclaims self-sufficiency to the soul via the [flesh] which is intimately
bonded to it."

Porphyry To Marcella 27 (202* U)                                      [1-119]

   "So he who follows nature and not groundless opinions is in all things
self-sufficient. For every possession is wealth when it comes to satisfying
nature, while even the greatest wealth is poverty when it comes to the
unlimited desires."

Porphyry To Marcella 29 (203 U)                                       [1-120]

   "Insofar as you are stymied, you are stymied because you forget nature;
for you burden yourself with unlimited fears and desires."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1105e (213 U)                                [1-121]

     "Sweet is the memory of a dead friend."

Maximus the Abbot Gnomologium 8 (214 U,                               [1-122]
199 A)
   "Do not avoid doing trivial favours, for you will seem to be like this
in important matters too."
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                      97

Maximus the Abbot Gnomologium 66 (215 U,                            [1-123]
200 A)
  "Do not turn away the request of an enemy in need; just protect
yourself, for he is no better than a dog."

Porphyry To Marcella 31 (221 U)                                     [1-124]

   "Empty is the argument of the philosopher by which no human disease
is healed; for just as there is no benefit in medicine if it does not drive
out bodily diseases, so there is no benefit in philosophy if it does not
drive out the disease of the soul."

Plutarch Against Colotes 1117f (222 U)                              [1-125]

  One of Epicurus' doctrines is that no one except the wise man is
unshakeably persuaded of anything.

Vatican Scholiast on Dionysius Thrax,                               [1-126]
Grammatici Graeci 1.3, p. 108.27-29 (Hilgard)
(227b U)
   This is how the Epicureans define craft: a craft is a method which
effects what is advantageous for [human] life. "Effects" is used in the
sense of "produces."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1093c (229a U)                             [1-127]

  They even reject the pleasures which come from mathematics!

Sextus PH 3.194 (398 U)                                             [1-128]

   Hence, the Epicureans too think that they are proving that pleasure
is naturally worth choosing; for they say that animals, as soon as they
are born and while they are still uncorrupted, have an impulse to pleasure
and avoid pains.

Alexander of Aphrodisias De Anima CIAG                              [1-129]
Supp. 2.1, p. 150.33-34 (398 U)
   The Epicureans held that what is first congenial to us, unqualifiedly,
is pleasure, but they say that as we get older this pleasure becomes articu-
lated.
98                                                                /-130 to /-140

Athenaeus Deipnosophists 12, 546f (409 U)                               [1-130]
   And Epicurus says, "the principle and root of all good is the pleasure
of the belly; and the sophisticated and refined [goods] are referred to
this one."

Plutarch Against Colotes 1122e (411 U)                                  [1-131]
  All by themselves and without a teacher, these noble and smooth and
agreeable motions of the flesh beckon, as they themselves say, even men
who refuse to admit that they are swayed and softened by them.

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1090b (413 U)                                  [1-132]
   So if the soul supposes that its good lies in the stable condition of the
body and in confidence about [the condition of] the body [as Epicurus
thinks it does], then it cannot live out its life free of fear and upset. For
the body is not only subject to storms and squalls from outside itself,
like the sea, but from within itself it generates more and greater upsets.

Damascius Lectures on the Philebus, 190                                 [1-133]
(p. 91 Westerink; 416 U)
     Even Epicurus, referring to natural pleasure, says that it is katastematic.

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1088c-e (417 U)                                [1-134]
   (1088c) ... Epicurus has assigned a common limit to [the pleasures],
the removal of all that causes pain, as though nature increased pleasure
up to the point where it eliminates the painful, but did not permit it to
make any further increase in its size, though it admits of certain non-
necessary variations once it gets free of distress. The journey [which we
make] towards this goal, in the company of desire, constitutes the [full]
measure of pleasure and it is certainly short and economical. (1088d)
That is why when they sense their stinginess in this area, they transfer
their goal from the body, which is a barren field, to the soul, in order to
acquire there pastures and meadows lushly overflowing with pleasures ...
   So don't you think that these men do well, in starting from the body,
which is the first place where pleasure makes its appearance, and going
on to the soul as something more secure which perfects everything within
itself? ...
   (1088e) ... but if you hear them crying out and shouting that the soul
by nature finds joy and tranquillity in no existing thing except the plea-
sures of the body, whether present or anticipated, and that this is its
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                           99
good, don't you think that they are using the soul as a kind of decanter
for the body and that they suppose that by pouring pleasure, like wine,
from a broken-down and leaky container to this [new container] and
aging it [there] they are doing something more impressive and valuable?

Stobaeus Anthology 3.17.34 (vol. 3 p. 501                                [I-135]
W-H; 422 U)
  "We need pleasure when we are in pain because of its absence; but
when we are not in this condition, and are in a stable state of sense-
perception, then there is no need for pleasure. For it is not the needs of
nature which produce injustice from without, but the desire based on
groundless opinions."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1091b (423 U)                                   [I-136]
  He says, "for unsurpassable joy is produced by comparison with a
great bad thing which one has escaped; and this is the nature of the
good, if one applies [one's intellect] properly and then takes a firm stand,
but does not stroll around babbling emptily about the good."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1099d (436 U)                                   [I-137]
  As they say, remembering previous goods is the most important factor
contributing to a pleasant life.

Aristocles, quoted by Eusebius at Prep. Ev.                              [I-138]
14.21.3 (442 U)
   It is better to endure these particular pains, so that we might experience
greater pleasures; and it is advantageous to refrain from these particular
pleasures so that we might not suffer from more burdensome pains.

Porphyry On Abstinence 1.51 (463 U)                                      [I-139]
   Variations in one's nourishment cannot possibly dissolve the distur-
bances of the soul, and indeed cannot even increase the pleasure in the
flesh; for this too reaches its limit as soon as the removal of pain is achieved.

Stobaeus Anthology 3.17.22 (vol. 3 p. 495                                [I-140]
W-H; 469 U)
   "I am grateful to blessed Nature, because she made what is necessary
easy to acquire and what is hard to acquire unnecessary."
100                                                         1-141 to 1-155

Porphyry To Marcella 27 (471 U)                                   [1-141]

   "It is rare to find a man who is <poor> with regard to the goal set by
nature and rich with regard to groundless opinions. For no imprudent
man is satisfied by what he has, but rather is distressed by what he does
not have. So just as people with a fever are always thirsty and desire the
most inconsistent things because of the malignancy of their <disease>, so
too those whose souls are in a bad condition always feel that they are
totally impoverished and enmeshed in all sorts of desires as a result of
their gluttony."

Aelian Miscellaneous History 4.13 (473 U)                         [1-142]

  "He for whom a little is not sufficient finds nothing sufficient."

Porphyry To Marcella 28 (476 U)                                   [1-143]

  "Self-sufficiency is the greatest wealth of all."

Porphyry To Marcella 28 (478 U)                                   [1-144]

   "Most men are afraid of parsimony in their life-style and because of
this fear proceed to actions which are most likely to produce it."

Porphyry To Marcella 28 (479 U)                                   [1-145]

  "Many men attain wealth but do not find therein an escape from their
problems; rather, they exchange them for greater problems."

Porphyry To Marcella 29 (480 U)                                   [1-146]

  "By hard labour fit for a beast a great quantity of wealth is heaped
up; but life is made miserable."

Porphyry To Marcella 29 (485 U)                                   [1-147]

   "For a man is unhappy either because of fear or because of unlimited
and groundless desire; and by reining these in he can produce for himself
the reasoning [which leads to] blessedness."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 12.10 (487 U)                            [1-148]

  "It is bad to live with necessity, but there is no necessity to live
with necessity."
Short Fragments and Testimonia from Uncertain Works                   101

Plutarch On Peace of Mind 474c (490 U)                            [1-149]

   "He who has least need of tomorrow will approach it with the great-
est pleasure."

Seneca Letters on Ethics 24.22-23 (496-498 U)                     [1-150]

   Epicurus reproaches those who long for death no less than those who
fear it, and says: "it is absurd to pursue death because you are weary of
life, when you have made death worth pursuing by your way of life." In
another place he says something similar: "So great is the folly, nay
madness, of men that some are driven to death by the fear of death." ...
"What is so absurd as to seek death when you have made your own life
troubled by fearing death."

Athenaeus Deipnosophists 12, 547a (512 U)                         [1-151]

  "I spit upon the honourable and on those who vainly admire it, when-
ever it produces no pleasure."

Clement of Alexandria Stromates 6.2,24.10                         [1-152]
p. 441 Stahlin (519 U)
  "The greatest fruit of justice is freedom from disturbance."

Arrian, Discourses of Epictetus 2.20.6-7                          [1-153]
(523 U)
   6. So too Epicurus, when he wishes to abolish the natural community
of men with one another, makes use of the very thing he is destroying.
7. For what does he say? Don't be deceived, men, or misled or mistaken:
there is no natural community of rational beings with each other. Believe
me: those who say otherwise are deceiving you and reasoning falsely.

Stobaeus Anthology 4.143 (vol. 4 p. 90 W-H;                       [1-154]
530 U)
  "The laws exist for the sake of the wise, not so that they will not
commit injustice but so that they will not suffer injustice."

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1090cd (532 U)                           [1-155]

   (1090c) ... for they say that those who break the law and commit
injustice live in fear and misery for all time, because even if they can
escape detection, it is nevertheless impossible to be confident about
102                                                           /-155 to //-1

escaping detection. (1090d) That is the source of the fear about the future
which always weighs on them and does not permit them to rejoice or be
of good cheer about the present.

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1104b (534 U)                             [1-156]
   For Epicurus does not think that one ought to restrain [people] from
injustice by any means other than the fear of punishment.

Plutarch A Pleasant Life 1097a (544 U)                             [1-157]
   And they themselves say that benefitting [others] is pleasanter than
receiving benefits.

Plutarch On How to Listen to Poets 37a                             [1-158]
(548 U)
   "It is not great sums of money or a mass of possessions, nor even
certain political offices and powers, which produce happiness and blessed-
ness, but rather freedom from pain and gentleness in our feelings and a
disposition of soul which measures out what is natural"

Aelian Miscellaneous Histories 4.13 (602 U)                        [1-159]
   [Epicurus] said that he was ready to rival Zeus for happiness, as long
as he had a barley cake and some water.


