II: Stoicism

Lives of the Stoics
Diogenes Laertius 7.1-38 (selections), 160-202                       [11-1]
(selections)
   1. Zeno, the son of Mnaseas or Demeas, was a citizen of Citium on
Cyprus, a Greek town which had Phoenician settlers ....
   2. As was said above, he studied with Crates; then they say that
he also studied with Stilpo and Xenocrates for ten years, according to
Timocrates in his Dion; but he also [is said to have studied with] Polemo.
Hecaton says (and so does Apollonius of Tyre in book one of his On
Zeno) that when he consulted the oracle to find out what he should do
to live the best life the god answered [that he would live the best life]
if he were to join his flesh with that of the dead. Seeing what this meant,
he read the works of the ancients.
   He met with Crates as follows. On a commercial voyage from Phoenicia
to sell purple dye he shipwrecked near the Piraeus. He went into Athens
(he was thirty years old at the time) and sat down by a certain bookseller.
The bookseller was reading the second book of Xenophon's Memorabilia;
he enjoyed it and asked where men like that [i.e., like Socrates] spent
their time. 3. Fortuitously, Crates came by and the bookseller pointed
to him and said, "Follow this man". From then on he studied with
Crates, being in other respects fit for and intent on philosophy but too
modest for Cynic shamelessness ....
   4. So he studied with Crates for a while; hence 1 when he wrote the
Republic too some people said in jest that he had written it 'on the tail
of the Dog' ....... In the end he left [Crates] and studied with those
already mentioned for twenty years; hence, they also say that he said "I
have had a good voyage this time, now that I have been shipwrecked."
But some say he said this about Crates. 5. And others say that he was
spending time in Athens when he heard about the shipwreck and [then]
said, "Fortune does me a big favour by driving me to philosophy." Some
say that he disposed of his cargo in Athens and so turned to philosophy.


l. We propose hothen for hote.

                                    103
104                                                                   //-1

   He used to set out his arguments while walking back and forth in the
Painted Stoa which was also named for Peisianax, but [called] 'Painted'
because of the painting by Polygnotus. He wanted to make sure that his
space was unobstructed by bystanders; for under the Thirty Tyrants
1400 citizens had been slaughtered in it. Still, people came to listen to
him and for this reason they were called Stoics; and his followers were
given the same name, although they had previously been called Zenonians,
as Epicurus also says in his letters ....
   15 .... He was devoted to enquiry and reasoned with precision on all
topics ... 16. He pursued his disputes with Philo the dialectician with
great care, and studied along with him. Hence, [Philo] was admired by
Zeno (who was younger than he) no less than his teacher Diodorus
[Cronus].
   20. When someone said that he thought that philosophers' arguments
were brief, he said, "you're right; but if possible even the syllables in
the arguments should be short." ... He said that one should converse
vigorously, as actors do, and that one should have a loud voice and great
strength but not distort one's mouth-which is what people do who
chatter about a lot of impossible things ....
   23. He used to say that there was nothing more alien to the grasp of
[various branches of] knowledge than [mere] opinion, and that we are in
need of nothing so much as time. Someone asked him what a friend is;
he said, "Another me." They say that he beat a slave for stealing. And
when he [the slave] said, "it was fated for me to steal," [Zeno] said, "and
to be flogged." ... 24. Apollonius ofTyre says that when Crates dragged
him away from Stilpo by the coat, [Zeno] said, "Crates, the sophisticated
way to get a hold on philosophers is by the ears. So persuade me and
drag me away by them; but if you use force on me, my body will be with
you and my soul with Stilpo."
   25. He also studied together with Diodorus, according to Hippobotus;
it was in his company that [Zeno] worked his way through dialectic.
When he was already making progress he came into Polemo's [lectures]
(a result of his freedom from arrogance); so they say that [Polemo] said,
"Zeno, I caught you sliding in by the garden gate to steal my doctrines
and dress them up in Phoenician style." He asked the dialectician who
showed him seven dialectical patterns in the Reaper argument how much
he charged for them; when he was told [that the price was] a hundred
drachmas, he gave him two hundred. So great was his love for learning.
They also say that he was the first to use the term 'appropriate act'
[kathekon] and to have developed a theory of it ....
   27 .... He had already become a kind of proverbial figure; anyway,
it was he who inspired the line, "more temperate than Zeno the philoso-
Lives of the Stoics                                                      105

pher" ... 28. In fact he surpassed everyone in this form of virtue and
in gravity and, Yes by Zeus! in blessedness. For he died at the age of
ninety-eight, free of disease and healthy to the end. But Persaeus says
in his Ethical Studies that he died at the age of seventy-two and that he
came to Athens at the age of twenty-two. And Apollonius says that he
headed his school for fifty-eight years. This is how he died: on leaving
his school he stumbled and broke his toe; he struck the earth with his
hand and uttered the line from the Niobe/ "I am coming. Why do you
call me?" and immediately died by suffocating himself.
   31. ... Demetrius of Magnesia says in his Men of the Same Name that
his father Mnaseas often came to Athens as a merchant and brought back
many Socratic books to Zeno when he was still a boy; hence, he got a
good training while still in his homeland. 32. And that is how he came
to Athens and joined Crates .... They say that he swore by the caper,
as Socrates did by the dog.
   But some people, including the followers of Cassius the sceptic, criticize
Zeno for many things, and first of all they say that he claimed, at the
beginning of his Republic, that general culture was useless; and second
that he said that all those who are not virtuous are hostile and enemies
and slaves and alien to each other, parents to children and brothers to
brothers <and> relatives to relatives. 33. Again, in the Republic he claimed
that only virtuous men are citizens and friends and relatives and free
men, so that, in the eyes of the Stoics, parents and children are enemies,
since they are not wise. Similarly, in his Republic he takes the position
that wives are [held] in common and at about line 200 [he holds] that
they do not build temples or law courts or gymnasia in their cities. He
writes as follows about coinage: "they do not think that one should
produce coinage either for the sake of exchange or for the sake of foreign
travel." And he orders that men and women should wear the same clothes
and that no part [of the body] should be hidden. 34. In his work On the
Republic Chrysippus says that the Republic is [indeed] by Zeno. And he
wrote about erotic matters at the beginning of the book entitled Art of
Sexual Love; but he also writes similar things in the Diatribes.
   That is the sort of thing [one finds] in Cassius, and also in [the works
of] the rhetor Isidor of Pergamum; he also says that the parts criticized
by the Stoics were excised by Athenodorus the Stoic who was entrusted
with the library in Pergamum; then they were restored when Athenodorus
was exposed and put in jeopardy. So much about the passages of his
work which have been marked as spurious ....
   36. There were many students of Zeno, but the well-known ones

2. Of Timotheus, 787 Page.
106                                                                   //-1

include the following. Persaeus of Citium, son of Demetrius; some say
he was his follower, others that he was a member of his household, one
of those sent by Antigonus to help him with his library, having been a
tutor to Antigonus' son Halcyoneus. Antigonus once wanted to put
Persaeus to the test and so had a false message announced to him to the
effect that his lands had been sacked by the enemy; when he frowned,
Antigonus said, "do you see that wealth is not an indifferent thing?" ...
   37. [Another student of Zeno was] Ariston of Chios, the son of Milti-
ades, the one who introduced [the doctrine of] indifference. And Herillus
of Carthage, the one who said that knowledge was the goal And Dionysius
the one who went over to hedonism; for because of a severe inflammation
of the eye he became reluctant to say any longer that pain was an
indifferent thing; he came from Heraclea. And Sphaerus from the
Bosporus. And Cleanthes, son of Phanias, from Assos, the one who took
over the school; Zeno compared him to writing tablets made of hard
wax, which are hard to write on but which retain what is written. Sphaerus
also studied under Cleanthes after Zeno's death, and we shall mention
him in our discussion of Cleanthes. 38. The following too were students
of Zeno, according to Hippobotus: Philonides of Thebes, Callippus of
Corinth, Posidonius of Alexandria, Athenodorus of Soli and Zeno of
Sidon ....
   160. Ariston of Chios, the Bald, [also] nicknamed the Siren. He said
that the goal was to live in a state of indifference with respect to what
is intermediate between virtue and vice, acknowledging no distinction
whatsoever in them but treating them all alike. For the wise man is like
a good actor, who plays either role fittingly, whether he takes on the role
of Thersites or Agamemnon. He abolished the topics of physics and
logic, saying that the one was beyond our powers and that the other was
nothing to us and that only ethics mattered to us.
   161. [He said] that dialectical arguments were like spider webs: al-
though they seem to indicate craftsmanlike skill, they are useless. He did
not introduce many virtues, as Zeno did, nor did he say that there was
one called by many names, as the Megarians did; rather, he appealed to
relative dispositions. By philosophizing thus and conversing in Cyno-
sarges he became important enough to be called the leader of a school
Thus Miltiades and Diphilus were called Aristonians. He was a persuasive
fellow and just what the crowd liked to hear ....
   162. He met Polemo and, as Diodes of Magnesia says, went over [to
his school] when Zeno became afflicted with a long illness. He was most
attached to the Stoic doctrine that the wise man is undogmatic. Persaeus
opposed him on this point and had one of a set of twins deposit money
with him and the other then get it back. Thus he perplexed and refuted
Lives of the Stoics                                                    107

him. And he opposed Arcesilaus; when he saw a deformed bull with a
womb he said, "Woe is me! Arcesilaus has been given an argument to
use against [trusting] clear facts". 163. To the Academic [sceptic] who
said that he grasped nothing he said, "Do you not see the man sitting
next to you?" And when the other said no, he said, "Who blinded you,
who took away the brightness of your eyesight?" ...
   165. Herillus of Carthage said that knowledge was the goal, i.e., always
living by referring everything to a life with knowledge and not being
discredited by ignorance. And knowledge is a condition concerned with
the reception of presentations, which is immune from being upset by
argument. He once said that there was no goal, but that it changed in
accordance with the circumstances and the facts, just as the same bronze
becomes a statue of Alexander or of Socrates. The goal and the subordi-
nate goal are different; for even men who are not wise aim at the latter,
while only the wise man aims at the former. And the things between
virtue and vice are indifferent. His books are short but are full of vigour
and include some counter-arguments aimed at Zeno....
   168. Cleanthes of Assos, son of Phanias. He was a boxer at first,
according to Antisthenes in his Successions. He arrived in Athens with
four drachmas, as some say, and meeting Zeno he began to philosophize
most nobly and stayed with the same doctrines. He was famous for his
love of hard work; since he was a poor man he undertook to work for
wages. And by night he laboured at watering gardens, while by day he
exercised himself in arguments ....
   171. ... When someone said that Arcesilaus did not do what he ought
to do, he said, "Stop it and do not blame the man; for even if he abolishes
appropriate action by his argument, at least he supports it by his deeds."
And Arcesilaus said, "I am not flattered." In response to which Cleanthes
said, "Yes, I am flattering you by claiming that you say one thing and
do another." ...
   174.... When someone criticized him for his old age, he said, "I too
want to make my exit. But when I consider everything and see that I
am completely healthy and able to write and to read, I continue to
wait." ...
   . . . 175.... And he died as follows. He got badly swollen gums, and
on the orders of his doctors he abstained from food for two days. And
somehow he got so much better that the doctors allowed him to eat his
customary diet, but he would not agree to this, instead saying that the
way was already prepared for him; and so he abstained for the rest of
his days and died, according to some, at the same age as Zeno did; he
had studied with Zeno for nineteen years ....
   177. As we said above, Sphaerus from the Bosporus also studied with
108                                                                      //-1

Cleanthes after [studying with] Zeno; he had made considerable progress
in argumentation and then went off to Alexandria to the court of Ptolemy
Philopator. Once, when a discussion arose about whether the wise man
will form opinions, Sphaerus said that he did not; the king wanted to
refute him and ordered wax pomegranates to be set out; Sphaerus was
fooled and the king shouted that he had assented to a false presentation.
To which Sphaerus nimbly replied by saying that what he had assented
to was not that they were pomegranates, but that it was reasonable that
they were pomegranates, and that there was a difference between a
graspable presentation and a reasonable one....
   179. Chrysippus, son of Apollonius, from Soli (or from Tarsus, as
Alexander says in the Successions), was a student of Cleanthes. He had
previously been in training as a long-distance runner; then he studied
with Zeno, or Cleanthes according to Diodes and the majority [of authori-
ties], and left his school while he [Cleanthes] was still alive and became
a significant philosophical figure. He was a man of natural ability and so
extremely clever in all parts [of philosophy] that in most points he differed
with Zeno, and even with Cleanthes, to whom he frequently said that
he only needed to be taught the doctrines and he himself would discover
the demonstrations. Nevertheless, whenever he resisted Cleanthes he
regretted it, so that he constantly quoted this: "I was born blessed in all
else, except with respect to Cleanthes; in this I am not happy." 3
   180. So famous did he become in dialectic that most people thought
that if there were dialectic among the gods it would be none other than
Chrysippus'. He had abundant material, but he did not get his style
right. He worked harder than anyone else, as is shown by his writings;
for there are more than 705 of them ....
   183 . ... He was so arrogant that when someone asked "To whom
should I send my son to study?" he said, "to me; for if I thought there
were anyone better than I, I would be philosophizing with him myselfl"
Hence they say that it was said of him, "He alone has wits, and the
[others] rush around like shadows". 4 and, "If there were no Chrysippus,
there would be no Stoa."
   In the end he philosophized with Arcesilaus and Lacydes, attending
[their meetings] in the Academy, according to Sotion in book 8. 184.
That is the reason why he argued both for and against [the reliability]
of ordinary experience and used the standard Academic technique when
discussing magnitudes and pluralities.
   Hermippus says that he was holding his session in the Odeon when

3. Euripides Orestes 540-1, adapted.
4. Homer, OdJ'SSeJ' 10.495.
Lives of the Stoics                                                      109

he was called to a sacrifice by his students; there he drank sweet, unmixed
wine, and losing his head left the realm of men on the fifth day at the
age of seventy-three, in the 143rd Olympiad [208-204 B.c.], as Apollo-
dorus says in his Chronology . ... 185. But some say that he died after
being seized with a fit of laughter; for when an ass had eaten his figs, he
said to the old woman, "So give the ass some unmixed wine to swill",
at which he cackled so heartily that he died ....
    186 . ... The philosopher also used to put forth arguments of this
sort: "He who tells the mysteries to the uninitiated is impious; but the
high priest tells <the mysteries> to the uninitiated; therefore, the high
priest is impious." Another one: "That which is not in the city is not in
the house; but a well is not in the city, so it is not in the house." Another
one: "There is a head; and you do not have it; there is indeed a head
<which you do not have>; therefore, you do not have a head." 187. Another
one: "If someone is in Megara, he is not in Athens; but a man is in
Megara; therefore, there is not a man in Athens." And again: "If you say
something, this comes out of your mouth; but you say wagon; therefore, a
wagon comes out of your mouth." And: "If you have not lost something,
then you have it; but you did not lose horns; therefore, you have horns".
But others say that this argument is by Euboulides.
    Some people assail Chrysippus for having written much that is shame-
ful and indecent. For in his work On the Ancient Natural Philosophers he
reinterprets the story about Hera and Zeus/ saying at line 600 or so
things which no one could say without defiling his mouth. 188. For, they
say, he reinterprets this story into something extremely shameful, even
if he does praise it as being a contribution to physics; still, it is more
fitting for cheap hookers than gods. The story, moreover, is not recorded
by the professional bibliographers; for [they say that] it is not found in
Polemo or Hypsicrates and not even in Antigonus, but that it was made
up by him. In the On the Republic he says [that one may] lie with mothers
and daughters and sons, and he says the same thing right at the beginning
of his On Things Not Worth Choosing for Their own Sakes. And around
line 1000 of book three of On the Just he urges that [people] should eat
the dead. And in book two of On Lift and the Making Money he says
that he is planning for how the wise man will make money. 189. And
yet, why must he make money? For if it is for the sake of life, life is an
indifferent; if for the sake of pleasure, this too is indifferent; and if for
the sake of virtue, then [virtue] is self-sufficient for happiness. And the
means of making money are ridiculous, such as [receiving it] from a
king-for one must yield to him; and [so too] for [making money] from

5. The deception of Zeus, Iliad 14.
110                                                               Il-l to //-3

friendship-for then friendship will be on sale for profit; and [so too]
for [making money] from wisdom-for then wisdom will be put to work
for wages.
   These are the criticisms of his work.


On Philosophy
Diogenes Laertius 7.38-41                                              [11-2]
   38 .... It seemed a good idea to me to give a general account of all
the Stoic doctrines in the life of Zeno, since he was the founder of the
school. ... The common doctrines are as follows. Let a summary account
be given, as has been our custom in the case of the other philosophers.
   39. They say that philosophical theory [logos] is tripartite. For one
part of it concerns nature [i.e., physics], another concerns character [i.e.,
ethics] and another concerns rational discourse [i.e., logic]. Zeno of Citium
first gave this division in his book On Rational Discourse [logos] and so
did Chrysippus in book one of On Rational Discourse and book one of
his Physics and so did Apollodorus and Syllos in the first books of their
respective Introductions to Doctrine; and so too did Eudromus in his
Outline of Ethics; and so too did Diogenes of Babylon and Posidonius.
Apollodorus calls these parts 'topics'; Chrysippus and Eudromus call
them 'species'; others call them 'kinds'.
   40. They compare philosophy to an animal, likening logic to the bones
and sinews, ethics to the fleshier parts and physics to the soul. Or again
they compare it to an egg. For the outer parts [the shell] are logic, the
next part [the white] is ethics and the inmost part [the yolk] is physics.
Or to a productive field, of which logic is the wall surrounding it, ethics
the fruit and physics is the land and trees. Or to a city which is beautifully
fortified and administered according to reason. And, as some Stoics say,
no part [of philosophy] is separate from another, but the parts are mixed.
And they taught [the three parts] mixed together. Others put logic first,
physics second and ethics third; Zeno (in his On Rational Discourse) and
Chrysippus and Archedemus and Eudromus are in this group.
   41. Diogenes ofPtolemais, though, begins with ethics and Apollodorus
puts ethics second; Panaetius and Posidonius start with physics, as Phae-
nias the follower of Posidonius says in book one of his Posidonian Lectures.
But Cleanthes says there are six parts: dialectic, rhetoric, ethics, politics,
physics and theology. Others say that these are not the parts of[philosoph-
ical] discourse, but of philosophy itself, as for example, Zeno of Tarsus.
Some say that the logical part is divided into two sciences, rhetoric and
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                              111

dialectic. And some say it is also divided into the species concerned with
definitions, and the one concerned with canons and criteria. Others omit
the definitional part.



Logic and Theory
of Knowledge
Diogenes Laertius 7.42-83                                                [11-3]

   42. So they include the [study] of canons and criteria in order to
discover the truth. For it is in this study that they straighten out the
differences among presentations; and similarly [they include] the defini-
tional part for the purpose of recognizing the truth. For objects are
grasped by means of conceptions. And rhetorical knowledge is about
speaking well in expository speeches, while dialectical knowledge is about
conversing correctly in speeches of question and answer form. And that
is why they also define it thus, as a knowledge of what is true and false
and neither.
   And they say that rhetoric itself is tripartite. For part of it is delibera-
tive, part forensic, part encomiastic. 43. It is divided into invention,
diction, organization and delivery. And the rhetorical speech [is divided]
into the introduction, the exposition, the counter-argument and the con-
clusion.
   And dialectic is divided into the topic about the signified and [the
topic about] the utterance. And the topic about the signified is [divided]
into that about presentations and [that about] the lekta [things said] which
subsist in dependence on them: propositions and complete [lekta] and
predicates and the active and passive [lekta] similar [to them] and genera
and species, and similarly arguments and modes and syllogisms and
fallacies caused by [the form of] utterance or by the facts. 44. These
include the arguments about the Liar and the Truth-teller and the Denier,
and sorites and arguments like these, incomplete, puzzling and conclusive,
and the [ones about] the Hooded man and Nobody and the Reaper.
   The aforementioned topic concerning the utterance itself is also proper
to dialectic; in it they explain the [kind of] utterance which is articulated
in letters and [also] what the parts of rational discourse are; it also
concerns solecism and barbarism and poems and ambiguities and harmo-
nious utterance and music; and, according to some, definitions and divi-
sions and [the study of different forms of] speech.
112                                                                      //-3

   45. They say that the study of syllogisms is extremely useful; for it
indicates what is demonstrative, and this makes a big contribution towards
correcting one's opinions; and orderliness and good memory indicate
attentive comprehension. And an argument itself is a complex [made up
of] premisses and a conclusion; and a syllogism is a syllogistic argument
[made up] of these. And demonstration is an argument which by means
of things more [clearly] grasped concludes to something which is less
[clearly] grasped.
   A presentation is an impression in a soul, the name being appropriately
transferred from the imprints in wax made by a seal-ring.
   46. Of presentations, some are graspable, some non-graspable. The
graspable presentation, which they say is the criterion of facts [pragmata ],
is that which comes from an existing object, and is stamped and moulded
in accordance with the existing object itself. The non-graspable presenta-
tion is either not from an existing object, or from an existing object but not
in accordance with it; it is neither clear nor well-stamped [i.e., distinct].
   Dialectic itself is necessary and is a virtue which contains other virtues
as species. And freedom from hasty judgement is knowledge of when
one ought to assent and when not. And level-headedness is a strong-
minded rationality with respect to what is likely, so that one does not
give in to it.
   47. And irrefutability is strength in argument, so that one is not swept
away by it to an opposite opinion. And intellectual seriousness is a
disposition which refers presentations to right reason. Knowledge itself,
they say, is either a secure grasp or a disposition in the reception of
presentations not reversible by argument. And the wise man will not be
free of error in argument without the study of dialectic. For truth and
falsity are distinguished by it and persuasive and ambiguous statements
are properly discerned by it. And without it methodical question and
answer are impossible.
   48. Hasty judgement in assertions has an impact on events, so that
those who are not well exercised in handling presentations turn to unruli-
ness and aimlessness. And there is no other way for the wise man to show
himself to be sharp, quick-witted and, in general, clever in arguments. For
the same man will be able to converse properly and reason things out
and also take a position on issues put to him and respond to questions-
these are characteristics of a man experienced in dialectic.
    So, this is a summary of their doctrines in logic; and in order to
give a detailed account also of those of their views which pertain to an
introductory textbook, <I shall report> verbatim exactly <what> Diodes
of Magnesia includes in his Survey of Philosophers, writing as follows.
   49. The Stoics choose to put first the account of presentation and
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                             113

sense-perception, insofar as the criterion by which the truth of facts is
known is, generically, the presentation; and insofar as the account of
assent and the account of grasping and conception which is basic to other
accounts cannot be given without presentation. For the presentation is
first and then the intellect, which is verbally expressive, puts into rational
discourse what it experiences because of presentation.
   50. Presentation and phantasm are different. For a phantasm is a
semblance in the intellect of the sort which occurs in sleep and presenta-
tion is an impression in the soul, i.e., an alteration, as Chrysippus supposes
in book 2 of his On Soul. For one should not interpret "impression" as
[being like] the stamped outline made by a seal-ring, since it is impossible
for there to be many outlines in the same respect and on the same
substance. One conceives of a presentation which is from an existing
object and is moulded, outlined and stamped in accordance with the
existing object, such as could not come from a non-existing object.
   51. According to them, some presentations are sensible, some are non-
sensible. Those received through one or more sense organs are sensible;
non-sensible are those which come through the intellect, for example,
presentations of incorporeals and the other things grasped by reason. Of
sensible presentations, those which come from existing objects occur with
yielding and assent. But [representational] images 6 which are "as if" from
existing objects are also [counted] among the presentations. Again, of
presentations some are rational, some are non-rational. The presentations
of rational animals are rational, those of non-rational animals are non-
rational. The rational, then, are thoughts and the irrational have been
given no special name. And some presentations are technical, some non-
technical. For an image is considered differently by a technical specialist
and by a non-specialist.
   52. According to the Stoics, 'sense-perception' refers to [a] the pneuma
which extends from the leading part to the senses and [b] the "grasp"
which comes through the senses and [c] the equipment of the sense
organs (which some people may be impaired in). And [d] their activation
is also called sense-perception. According to them the grasp occurs [a]
through sense-perception (in the case of white objects, black objects,
rough objects, smooth objects); and [b] through reason (in the case of
conclusions drawn through demonstration, for example, that there are
gods and that they are provident). For of conceptions, some are conceived
on the basis of direct experience, some on the basis of similarity, some
on the basis of analogy, <some on the basis of transposition,> some on
the basis of composition and some on the basis of opposition.

6. SeeM 7.169.
114                                                                      //-3

   53. Sensibles are conceived on the basis of direct experience; on the
basis of similarity are conceived things [known] from something which
is at hand-as Socrates is conceived of on the basis of his statue; on the
basis of analogy things are conceived by expansion, for example, Tityos
and the Cyclops, and by shrinking, for example, a Pygmy. And the centre
of the earth is conceived through analogy with smaller spheres. On the
basis of transposition, for example, eyes in the chest. On the basis of
composition the Hippocentaur is conceived of; and death on the basis of
opposition [to life]. Some things too are conceived of on the basis of
transference, for example, the things said [lekta] and place. And there is
a natural origin too for the conception of something just and good. Also
on the basis of privation, for example, a man without a hand. These are
their doctrines on presentation, sense-perception and conception.
   54. They say that the graspable presentation, i.e. the one from what
exists, is a criterion of truth, as Chrysippus says in book 2 of the Physics
and Antipater and Apollodorus too. For Boethus says that there are a
number of criteria: mind, sense-perception, desire, and knowledge. But
Chrysippus, disagreeing with him in book one of On Rational Discourse,
says that sense-perception and the basic grasp are criteria. (A basic grasp
is a natural conception of things which are universal.) And other older
Stoics say that right reason is a criterion, as Posidonius says in his On
the Criterion.
   55. Most of them are agreed that the study of dialectic should begin
from the topic of utterance. An utterance is air which has been struck,
or the proper sensible of hearing, as Diogenes of Babylon says in his
Treatise on Utterance. An animal's utterance is air struck by an impulse,
while a human [utterance] is articulate and emitted from the intellect,
as Diogenes says; and this [the intellect] is completed from the age of
fourteen on. And utterance is a body, according to the Stoics, as Archede-
mus says in his On Utterance and Diogenes and Anti pater, and Chrysippus
in book two of his Physics. 56. For everything which acts is a body, and
voice does act when it comes to the listeners from the utterers. As
Diogenes says, speech, according to the Stoics, is an utterance in letters,
for example 'day'. Rational discourse [logos] is an utterance which signifies,
emitted from the intellect; <for example, 'It is day'.> And dialect is speech
marked both as Greek and as distinctive of a [specific] ethnic group; or
speech from a particular region, i.e., which is peculiar in its dialect. For
example, in Attic [one says] thalatta [for thalassa], and in Ionic hemere
[for hemera].
   The elements of speech are the twenty-four letters. Letter is used in
three sense, <the element>, the character and the name, for example alpha.
57. There are seven vowels among the elements, alpha, epsilon, eta, iota,
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                                           115

omicron, upsilon, omega; and six mutes: beta, gamma, delta, kappa, pi,
tau. Utterance and speech differ in that utterance also includes echoes,
while only what is articulate [counts as] speech. And speech differs from
rational discourse in that rational discourse is always significant, and
speech [can] also [be] meaningless, like the 'word' blituri, while rational
discourse cannot be. There is a difference between saying and verbalizing.
For utterances are verbalized, while what is said are facts (which [is why
they] are also 'things said' [lekta]).
   There are five parts of rational discourse, as Diogenes says in On
Utterance and also Chrysippus: name, noun, verb, conjunction, article.
And Anti pater also adds the participle in his On Speech and Things Which
are Said.
   58. According to Diogenes, a noun is a part of rational discourse which
signifies a common quality, for example 'man', 'horse'; a name is a part
of rational discourse which reveals an individual quality, for example
'Diogenes', 'Socrates'; a verb as Diogenes says, is a part of rational
discourse which signifies an incomposite predicate, or as others [say], it
is an undeclined element of rational discourse which signifies something
put together with [lit. of] some thing or things, for example 'write',
'speak'; a conjunction is an undeclined part of rational discourse which
joins together the parts of rational discourse; an article is a declined
element of rational discourse which distinguishes the genders and num-
bers of names, for example ho, he, to, hoi, hai, ta. 7
   59. There are five virtues of rational discourse: good Greek, clarity,
brevity, propriety, elaboration. Good Greek, then, is diction which is in
conformity not with any common usage but one sanctioned by the art
[of grammar]; clarity is speech which presents what is thought in a
recognizable fashion; brevity is speech which includes exactly what is
necessary for the revelation of its object; propriety is speech which is
appropriate to its object; elaboration is speech which has transcended
ordinariness. Of the vices, barbarism is a [form of] speech which violates
the normal usage of reputable Greeks; solecism is rational discourse which
is put together incongruently.
   60. According to Posidonius in his Introduction to Speech, a poem is
metrical speech, or rhythmical speech together with elaboration which
escapes being prosaic. The rhythmical is: 8

           Greatest Earth and Zeus' sky.

7. The six nominative forms of the Greek article 'the', given in singular and plural numbers
and masculine, feminine and neuter genders.
8. The metre of the Greek (fr. 839 ofEuripides inNauck) cannot be reproduced in translation.
116                                                                                      //-3

But a 'poesis' is a poem which signifies in virtue of containing an imitation
of divine and human affairs.
   A definition is, as Antipater says in book one of his On Definitions, an
analytical statment [logos] expressed precisely, or as Chrysippus says in
his On Definitions, the rendering of what is proper [to the thing]. An
outline is a statement which introduces [us] to the objects by a [general]
impression, or a definition which introduces the force of the definition
[proper] in simpler form. A genus is a conjunction of several inseparable
concepts, for example, 'animal'; for this includes the particular animals.
   61. A concept is a phantasm of the intellect, and is neither a something
nor a qualified thing, but [rather] a quasi-something and a quasi-qualified
thing; for example, there arises an impression of a horse even when no
horse is present.
   A species is that which is included by a genus, as man is included in
animal. The most generic is that which, being a genus, does not have a
genus, i.e., being; the most specific is that which, being a species, does
not have a species, for example, Socrates.
   Division is the cutting of a genus into its immediate species, for
example: of animals, some are rational and some are irrational. Counter-
division is a division of the genus into a species in virtue of its opposite,
as when things are divided by negation, for example: of beings, some are
good and some are not good. Subdivision is a division following on a
division, for example: of beings some are good and some are not good,
and of things not good some are bad and some are indifferent.
   62. A partitioning is an arrangement of a genus into its topics, according
to Krinis; for example: of goods some belong to the soul and some belong
to the body.
   Ambiguity is a speech which signifies two or even more things, linguis-
tically and strictly and in virtue of the same usage, so that by means of
this speech several things are understood at the same time. 9 For example,
auletrispeptoke; for by means of this [speech] are indicated something like
this "a house fell three times" and something like this "a flute girl fell".
   According to Posidionius, dialectic is a knowledge of what is true,
what is false and what is neither. And, as Chrysippus says, it is concerned
with signifiers and what is signified. This, then, is the sort of thing said
by the Stoics in their study of utterance.
   63. In the topic of objects and things signified are placed the account


9. 'Speech' is utterance articulable in letters(ยง 56 above). Our translation has been improved
by reflection on ch. 4 of Catherine Atherton's excellent book, The Stoics on Ambiguity
(Cambridge 1993). The ambiguity in the example which follows is untranslatable, but
stems from alternate divisions into words of the same syllables.
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                                     117

of lekta [things said], complete ones and propositions and syllogisms,
and the account of incomplete [lekta] and predicates both active and
passive. And they say that a lekton is what subsists in accordance with a
rational presentation. And of lekta the Stoics say that some are complete
and some are incomplete. Incomplete are those which are unfinished in
their expression, such as 'writes'; for we go on to ask 'Who?' Complete
are those which are finished in their expression, such as 'Socrates writes'.
So predicates are placed among the incomplete lekta, and propositions
and syllogisms and questions and enquiries are placed among the com-
plete.
    64. A predicate is what is said of something, or a thing put together
with [lit. about] some thing or things, as Apollodorus says; or an incom-
plete lekton put together with a nominative case to generate a proposition.
Of predicates, some are events, such as 'to sail through the rocks' ...
[There is a lacuna here.] And some predicates are active, some passive,
some neither. Active are those put together with one of the oblique cases
to generate a predicate, such as 'hears', 'sees', 'discusses'. Passive are
those put together with the passive form, such as 'am heard', 'am seen'.
Neither are those which fit in neither group, such as 'to be prudent', 'to
walk'. Reflexive passives are those which, being passive, are [nevertheless]
actions, such as 'gets his hair cut'. For the man getting his hair cut
includes himself [in his action]. 65. The oblique cases are the genitive,
the dative and the accusative.
   A proposition is that which is true or false; or a complete object which
can be asserted on its own, as Chrysippus says in his Dialectical Definitions:
"a proposition is what can be asserted or denied on its own, for example,
'It is day' or 'Dion is walking'." The proposition gets its name [axioma]
from being accepted; 10 for he who says 'It is day' seems to accept [axioun]
that it is day. So when it is day, the present proposition becomes true,
and when it is not [day], it becomes false. 66. There are differences among
propositions, questions, enquiries, imperatives, oaths, curses, hypotheses,
addresses, and objects similar to a proposition. For a proposition is what
we say when we reveal something and it is this which is true or false. A
question is a complete object, like the proposition, which asks for an
answer; for example, 'Is it day?' This is neither true nor false, so that
'it is day' is a proposition and 'Is it day?' is a question. An enquiry is
an object to which one cannot give an answer with a gesture, as one can
to a question [by indicating] 'Yes', but [in response to which one must]
say [for example,] 'He lives in this place'.

10. The words which follow "or rejected" seem wrong and we omit them at the suggestion
of Michael Frede.
118                                                                                  //-3

   67. An imperative is an object which we say when we give an order,
for example, u

           'You, go to the streams of Inachus.'

An oath is an object ..... [There is a lacuna here.] <and an address is
an object> which, if one were to say, one would be addressing [someone];
for example, 12

           'Noblest son of Atreus, lord of men Agamemnon!'

[An object] similar to a proposition is what has a propositional [form of]
utterance, but because of the excessiveness or emotional quality of one
part of it falls outside the class of propositions; for example,

           'Fair is the Parthenon!'
           'How similar to Priam's sons is the cowherd!>t 3

68. There is also a dubitative object which is different from a proposition,
and if one were to say it one would be expressing puzzlement: 14

           'Are pain and life somehow akin?'

  Questions, enquiries and things like these are neither true nor false,
while propositions are either true or false.
  Of propositions, some are simple, some not simple, as the followers
of Chrysippus and Archedemus and Athenodorus and Antipater and
Krinis say. So, the simple are those which are composed of a proposition
which is not doubled, 15 such as 'It is day'. The not simple are those
composed of a doubled proposition or of propositions. 69. From a doubled
proposition: for example, 'If it is day, it is day'; from propositions, for
example, 'If it is day, it is light'.
  Among simple propositions are the contradictory and the negative and
the privative and the predicative and the predicational and the indefinite;

11. A fragment of an unknown Greek tragedy, 177 N auck 2.
12. Iliad 2.434.
13. A fragment of an unknown Greek tragedy, 286 Nauck.
14. Kock iii, Men. 281 v. 8
15. The reading diphoroumenoi which yields this sense is found in Alexander of Aphrodisias
(SVF 2.261, 263).
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                               119

and among the non-simple propositions are the conditional and the para-
conditional and the compound and the disjunctive and the causal and
that which indicates the more and that which indicates the less ....
[There is a lacuna here.] and a contradictory, for example, 'It is not the
case that it is day.' A species of this is the double contradictory. A double
contradictory is the contradictory of a contradictory, for example, 'It is
not the case that it is <not> day'. It posits that it is day.
   70. A negative [proposition] is that which is composed of a negative
particle and a predicate, for example, 'no-one is walking'. A privative is
that which is composed of a privative particle and a potential proposition,
for example, 'This [man] is unphilanthropic'. A predicative is that which
is composed of a nominative case and a predicate, for example, 'Dion is
walking'. A predicational is that which is composed of a demonstrative
nominative case and a predicate, for example, 'This [man] is walking'.
An indefinite is that which is composed of an indefinite particle or
indefinite particles <and a predicate>, for example, 'someone is walking'
and 'that [man] is in motion'.
   71. Of the non-simple propositions, a conditional is, as Chrysippus
says in his Dialectics and Diogenes in his Art of Dialectic, that which is
compounded by means of the conditional conjunction 'if'. This conjunc-
tion indicates that the second [proposition] follows the first, for example,
'if it is day, it is light'. A paraconditional [inference] is, as Krinis says
in his Art of Dialectic, a proposition which is bound together by the
conjunction 'since', and which begins with a proposition and ends with
a proposition, for example, 'since it is day, it is light.' The conjunction
indicates that the second [proposition] follows the first and that the first
is the case. 72. A compound is a proposition which is compounded by
certain compounding conjunctions, for example, 'both it is day and it is
night'. A disjunctive is that which is disjoined by the disjunctive conjunc-
tion, for example, 'either it is day or it is night'. This conjunction indicates
that one of the two propositions is false. A causal proposition is one put
together by means of'because', for example, 'because it is day, it is light'.
For the first is, as it were, the cause of the second. A proposition which
indicates the more is one put together by means of the conjunction
which indicates 'more', and the [conjunction] 'than' put between the
propositions, for example, 'It is more day than it is night'. 73. The
proposition indicating the less is the opposite of the preceding, for exam-
ple, 'It is less night than it is day'.
   Again, among propositions, those are opposed to each other with
respect to truth and falsehood where one is the contradictory of the other;
for example, 'it is day' and 'it is not day'. A conditional is true if the
opposite of the conclusion conflicts with the antecedent, for example, 'if
120                                                                           //-3

it is day, it is light'. This is true; for 'it is not light', being the opposite
of the conclusion, conflicts with 'it is day'. A conditional is false if the
opposite of the conclusion does not conflict with the antecedent, for
example, 'if it is day, Dion is walking'; for 'it is not the case that Dion
is walking' does not conflict with 'it is day'.
    74. A paraconditional is true if it begins with a true [proposition] and
concludes with one which follows [from it], for example, 'since it is day,
the sun is over the earth.' A false [paraconditional] is one which either
starts with a false [proposition] or concludes in one which does not follow
from it, for example, 'since it is night, Dion is walking', if it is said when
it is day. A true causal [proposition] is one which begins from a true
[proposition] and concludes in one which follows from it, but whose first
[proposition] does not follow from the conclusion; for example, 'because
it is day, it is light'. For 'it is light' follows from 'it is day' and 'it is day'
does not follow from 'it is light'. A false causal [proposition] is one which
either [1] begins from a falsehood or [2] concludes in a [proposition]
which does not follow from it or [3] one whose first [proposition] follows
from the consequent.
    75. A persuasive proposition is one which leads to assent, for example,
'if someone gave birth to something, she is its mother'. But this is false;
for the bird is not the mother of the egg.
    Again, some [propositions] are possible and some are impossible; and
some are necessary and some are not necessary. That [proposition] is
possible which admits of being true, if external factors do not prevent
it from being true, for example, 'Diodes is alive'. That [proposition] is
impossible which does not admit of being true, for example, 'the earth
flies'. The necessary is that which, being true, is not receptive of being
false, or is receptive of being false but external factors prevent it from
being false, for example, 'virtue is beneficial'. The non-necessary is that
which both is true and is able to be false, with external factors not
opposing it at all, for example, 'Dion is walking'.
    76. A reasonable proposition is one which has more chances at being
true [than not], such as 'I will be alive tomorrow'.
    And there are other differences among propositions and changes of
them from true to false, and conversions; these we discuss in a general
fashion.
    As the followers of Krinis say, an argument is what is composed of a
premiss, an additional statement, and a conclusion. For example, some-
thing like this:

          If it is day, it is light.
          It is day.
          Therefore, it is light.
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                           121

For the premiss is "if it is day, it is light"; the additional statement is
"it is day"; and the conclusion is "therefore, it is light". A mode is a
sort of schema for an argument, such as this:

          If the first, the second.
          But the first.
          Therefore, the second.

77. An argument-mode is what is compounded of both [the argument
and the schema], for example,

          If Plato is alive, Plato breathes.
          But the first.
          Therefore, the second.

The argument-mode was added in order to avoid having to repeat the
long additional statement and the conclusion in a somewhat lengthy series
of arguments, so that the conclusion can be given briefly: The first;
therefore, the second.
   Of arguments, some are non-conclusive, others are conclusive. Non-
conclusive are those where the opposite of the conclusion is not in conflict
with the conjunction of the premisses, for example, arguments like this:

          If it is day, it is light.
          It is day.
          Therefore, Dion is walking.

78. Of conclusive arguments, some are called conclusive homonymously
with the genus. Others are syllogistic. Syllogistic arguments, then, are
those which are either indemonstrable or reducible to the indemonstrables
by one or more of the themata, for example, ones like this: 16

          If Dion is walking, <Dion is moving.
          But Dion is walking.>
          Dion is, therefore, moving.

Those conclusive in the specific sense are ones which reach a [valid]
conclusion non-syllogistically, for example, ones like this:


16. The textual supplement is by Hicks.
122                                                                    //-3

         It is false that it is day and it is night.
         It is day.
         Therefore, it is not night.

Unsyllogistic are those which are persuasively similar to syllogistic argu-
ments, but do not conclude [validly], for example,


         If Dion is a horse, Dion is an animal.
         But Dion is not a horse.
         Therefore, Dion is not an animal.

79. Again, of arguments some are true, some false. True arguments,
then, are those which conclude [validly] by means of true premisses,
for example,


         If virtue is helpful, vice is harmful.
         <But virtue is helpful.
         Therefore, vice is harmful.>

False arguments are those having at least one false premiss or those which
are non-conclusive, for example,


         If it is day, it is light.
         It is day.
         Therefore, Dion is alive.

And there are possible arguments and impossible and necessary and non-
necessary. And there are indemonstrable arguments, because they do not
need demonstration, different ones being given by different authors. In
Chrysippus there are five, through which every argument is formed.
These are used in conclusive arguments, in syllogisms and in mode-
arguments.
   80. The first indemonstrable is that in which every argument is made
up of a conditional and the antecedent from which the conditional begins,
and concludes to the consequent, for example,


         If the first, the second.
         But the first.
         Therefore, the second.
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                             123

The second indemonstrable is that which, through a conditional and the
opposite of the consequent, draws as its conclusion the opposite of the
antecedent, for example,

         If it is day, it is light.
         But it is not light.
         Therefore, it is not day.

For the additional statement is formed from the opposite of the conse-
quent and the conclusion from the opposite of the antecedent. The third
indemonstrable is that which, through a negated conjunction and one of
the elements in the conjunction, concludes the opposite of the other
element, for example,

         It is not the case that Plato is dead and Plato is alive.
         But Plato is dead.
         Therefore, Plato is not alive.

81. The fourth indemonstrable is that which, through a disjunction and
one of the disjuncts, has as its conclusion the opposite of the other,
for example,

         Either the first or the second.
         But the first.
         Therefore, not the second.

The fifth indemonstrable is that in which every argument is formed from
a disjunction and the opposite of one of the disjuncts and concludes the
other, for example,

         Either it is day or it is night.
         It is not night.
         Therefore, it is day.

According to the Stoics a truth follows from a truth, as 'it is light' follows
from 'it is day'. And a falsehood follows from a falsehood, as 'it is dark'
follows from the falsehood 'it is night'. And a truth follows from a
falsehood, as 'the earth exists' follows from 'the earth flies'. A falsehood,
however, does not follow from a truth. For 'the earth flies' does not follow
from 'the earth exists'. 82. And there are certain puzzling arguments, the
Hooded Man, the Hidden Man, the Sorites, the Horned Man, and the
124                                                             //-3 to //-5

Nobody. And the Hooded Man is like this ... [There is a lacuna here,
which includes the introduction of the sorites.] 'It is not the case that
two are few and that three are not [few]; and it is not the case these are
[few] but four (and so on up to ten) are not [few]; but two are few;
therefore, so is ten.' .... [There is a lacuna here.] The Nobody is an
argument which draws a conclusion and is composed of an indefinite
and a definite, having an additional statement and a conclusion, for
example, 'If someone is here, that [someone] is not in Rhodes; <but
someone is here; therefore, there is not someone in Rhodes>.' ... [There
is a lacuna here.]
   83. And this is what the Stoics are like in logical matters, so that they
can maintain that the wise man is always a dialectician. For everything
is seen through consideration of it in arguments: both what belongs to
the topic of physics and again what belongs to ethics. For if the logician
is supposed to say something about the correct use of terms, how could
he fail to say what are the proper names for things? There are two
customary facets of the virtue [i.e. dialectic]; one considers what each
existent thing is, the other what it is called. And this is what their logic
is like.

Cicero Academica 1.40-42                                              [11-4]

   40. But in that third part of philosophy [i.e., logic] he [Zeno] made
quite a few changes. First, he made some new claims here about the
senses themselves, which he held were joined to a sort of stimulus received
from the outside world (he called this a phantasia but we may call it a
presentation-and let us hold on to this term, for we will have to use it
often in the rest of our discussion). But to these presentations which are,
as it were, received by the senses he joined the assent given by our minds,
which he claims is in our power and voluntary. 41. He said that not all
presentations are reliable, but only those which have a distinctive kind
of clear statement to make about the objects of presentation; when this
presentation is discerned all on its own, then it is "graspable" ... But
when it had been received and approved then he said it was a "grasping"-
like those things gripped by one's hand. Indeed, that is how he derived
the word, since no one had previously used this term in this connection;
and Zeno used quite a few new terms (for he was advancing new theories).
What had been grasped by sense-perception, he called this itself a "sense-
perception" and if it was grasped in such a way that it could not be
shaken by argument he called it knowledge; if not, he called it ignorance,
which is also the source of opinion which is weak and a state shared with
what is false and not known. 42. But between knowledge and ignorance
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                            125

he placed that "grasp" which I just mentioned and said it was neither
right nor wrong but that it alone deserved to be believed. Therefore, he
said the senses too were reliable because, as I said above, he thought that
a grasp made by the senses was true and reliable, not because it grasped
everything about the object but because it left out nothing [about it]
which could be grasped and because nature had provided this grasp as
a standard for knowledge and a basis for understanding nature itself.
From such [perceptual grasps] conceptions of things are subsequently
impressed on the soul, and these provide not just the foundations but
also certain broader paths leading to the discovery of reason. Error,
however, and rashness and ignorance and opinion and conjecture-in a
word, all that is hostile to a solid and stable assent-all these he banned
from the sphere of wisdom and virtue. On these points rests all of Zeno's
departure from and disagreement with his predecessors.

Cicero Academica 2.24-26                                               [11-5]

   24 . ... And, moreover, this point is obvious, that there must be a
principle which wisdom follows when it begins to do something and this
principle must be according to nature. For otherwise impulse (for that
is the translation we use for horme), by which we are driven to act and
pursue what is presented, cannot be stimulated. 25. But that which
stimulates must first be presented [to the agent] and it must be believed;
and this cannot happen if what is presented cannot be distinguished from
what is false. For how can the mind be moved to an impulse if there is
no judgement as to whether what is presented is according to nature or
contrary to it? Similarly, if the mind does not realize what is appropriate
to it, it will never do anything at all, will never be driven to anything,
will never be stimulated. But if it is ever to be moved, what occurs to
the agent must be presented as being true.
   26. And what of the fact that, if the sceptics are right, all reason is
abolished, which is like the light and illumination of life? Will you persist
in that kind of perversity? For reason provides a starting point for inquiry,
which perfects virtue when reason itself has been strengthened by inquir-
ing. And inquiry is an impulse to knowledge and discovery is the goal
of inquiry. But no one discovers what is false, nor can matters which
remain uncertain be discovered; but when things which were previously
veiled are revealed, then they are said to be discovered, and thus both
the starting point of inquiry and the conclusion of perception and under-
standing are obtained by the mind. A demonstration (the Greek is apo-
deixis) is defined thus: "an argument which leads from things perceived
to that which previously was not perceived."
126                                                            //-6 to //-9

Cicero Academica 2.144-5                                            [11-6]
    144 . ... First I shall expound those odious theories, in which you
[i.e., Stoics] say that all of those [ordinary people] who stand in the
assembly are exiles, slaves and madmen. Then I shall move on to the
theories which pertain not to the mass of people but to you yourselves
who are present now: Zeno and Antiochus deny that you know anything.
"How so?" you will ask, "for we hold that even an unwise man grasps
many things." 145. But you deny that anyone except the wise man knows
anything. And Zeno used to make this point by using a gesture. When
he held out his hand with open fingers, he would say, "this is what a
presentation is like." Then when he had closed his fingers a bit, he said,
"assent is like this." And when he had compressed it completely and
made a fist, he said that this was grasping (and on the basis of this
comparison he even gave it the name katalepsis [grasp], which had not
previously existed). But when he put his left hand over it and compressed
it tightly and powerfully, he said that knowledge was this sort of thing
and that no one except the wise man possessed it. But they themselves
are not in the habit of saying who is or has been wise.

Porphyry De Anima (in Stobaeus Anthology                            [11-7]
1.49.25, vol. 1 p. 349.23-27 W-H; SVF 2.74)
   The Stoics did not make sense-perception consist in presentation alone,
but made its substance depend on assent; for perception is an assent to
a perceptual presentation, the assent being voluntary.

Sextus M 7.227-236 (SVF 2.56)                                       [11-8]
   227. Since the Stoic doctrine remains, let us next speak of it. These
men, then, say that the graspable presentation is a criterion of truth. We
shall know this if we first learn what presentation is, according to them,
and what its specific differentiae are. 228. So, according to them, a
presentation is an impression in the soul. And they differed immediately
about this. For Cleanthes took "impression" in terms of depression and
elevation-just like the impression on wax made by seal-rings. 229. But
Chrysippus thought that such a view was absurd. For first, he says, this
will require that when our intellect has presentations at one time of a
triangle and a tetragon, the same body will have to have in itself at the
same time different shapes-triangular and tetragonal together, or even
round; which is absurd. Next, since many presentations exist in us at
the same time the soul will also have many configurations. This is worse
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                              127

than the first problem. 230. [Chrysippus] himself speculated, therefore,
that "impression" was used by Zeno to mean "alteration"; so that the
definition becomes like this: 'presentation is an alteration of the soul';
for it is no longer absurd that the same body at one and the same time
(when many presentations exist in us) should receive many alterations.
231. For just as air, when many people speak at once, receiving at one
time an indefinite number of different blows, also has many alterations,
so too the leading part of the soul will experience something similar when
it receives varied presentations.
    232. But others say that even Chrysippus' corrected definition is not
right. For if a presentation exists, then it is an impression and an alteration
in the soul. But if an impression in the soul exists, it is not necessarily
a presentation. For if a blow to the finger or a scratch to the hand
occurs, an impression and alteration are produced in the soul, but not a
presentation, since the latter occurs not in any chance part of the soul,
but only in the intellect, that is, in the leading part of the soul. 233. In
response, the Stoics say that 'impression in the soul' implies 'insofar as
it is in the soul' .... 234. Others, starting from the same basic position,
have defended their position more subtly. For they say that 'soul' is
meant in two senses, one referring to that which holds together the entire,
continuous composite, and the other referring particularly to the leading
part. For whenever we say that man is composed of soul and body, or
that death is the separation of soul from body, we are speaking particularly
of the leading part .... 236. Therefore, when Zeno says that presentation
is an impression in the soul, he should be understood to mean not the
whole soul but only a part of it, so that what is said is "presentation is
an alteration in the leading part of the soul".

Sextus M 7.372-373 (SVF 2.56; 1.64, 484)                                 [11-9]

   372 .... For if presentation is an impression in the soul, either the
impression is in terms of depressions and elevation, as Cleanthes and his
followers think, or it is in terms of simple alteration, as Chrysippus and
his followers thought. 373. And if on the one hand these exist in terms
of depression and elevation, then the absurdities alleged by the Chrysip-
peans will follow. For if the soul in experiencing a presentation is stamped
like wax, the most recent change will always obscure the previous presen-
tation, just as the outline of the second seal wipes out the former one.
But if this is the case, then memory, which is a storehouse of presentations,
is destroyed, and so is every craft. For craft was defined as a complex
and a collection of grasps, and it is impossible for several different
128                                                                //-9 to //-13

presentations to exist in the leading part [of the soul] since different
impressions are conceived in it at different times. Therefore, an impres-
sion, strictly conceived, is not a presentation.

Sextus M 8.56-58 (SVF 2.88)                                              [11-10]

   56 .... For every thought comes from sense-perception or not without
sense-perception and either from direct experience or not without direct
experience. 57. Hence, we shall find that not even the so-called false
presentations (for example, those occurring in sleep or madness) are
independent of things known to us through sense-perception by direct
experience.... 58. And in general one can find nothing in our conceptions
which is not known to oneself in direct experience. For it is grasped
either by similarity to what is revealed in direct experience or by expansion
or reduction or compounding.

Sextus M 8.27 5-6                                                        [11-11]

   275. But if the sign is neither sensible, as we have shown, nor intelligi-
ble, as we have established, and there is no third possibility beyond these,
one must say that the sign is not a something. The dogmatists are silenced
by each of these arguments and in their effort to prove the opposite they
say that man differs from the irrational animals not in virtue of verbalized
reason (since crows and parrots and jays verbalize articulate utterances)
but in virtue of internal reason; 276. and not in virtue of just a simple
presentation (since they too receive presentations) but in virtue of a
presentation which is based on transference and composition. And that
is why, having a conception of logical consequence, man immediately
derives a conception of a sign as a result of the logical consequence. For
the sign itself is something like this: "if this, this". Therefore, the existence
of a sign follows on the nature and constitution of man.

Aetius 4.11.1-5 (= Dox. Gr. pp. 400-401;                                 [11-12]
SVF 2.83) The origin of sense-perception,
conceptions and internal reason.
   1. The Stoics say: When man is born, the leading part of his soul is
like a sheet of paper in good condition for being written on. On this he
inscribes each and every one of his conceptions.
   2. The first manner of writing on it is through the senses. For when
one perceives something, white, for example, one retains a memory after
it goes away. When there are many memories similar in kind then we
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                            129

say one has experience. For experience is the plurality of presentations
similar in kind.
   3. Of conceptions, some come into being naturally in the stated ways
and without technical elaboration, but others, already, come into being
through our teaching and efforts. The latter are called just conceptions,
while the former are also called basic grasps.
   4. But reason, according to which we are termed rational, is said to
be completely filled out with basic grasps at the age of seven years. And
a concept is a phantasm of the intellect of a rational animal. For when
a phantasm occurs in a rational soul, then it is called a concept, taking
its name from "mind" [ennoema, from nous].
   5. Therefore, all the phantasms which strike irrational animals are only
phantasms and those which occur in us and in the gods are phantasms
in general and specifically concepts. Gust as denarii and staters, on their
own, are denarii and staters, but when they are given to pay for a ship-
passage, then they are called "ship money" in addition to being denarii
[and staters].)

Aetius 4.12.1-6 (=Dox.Gr. p. 401-402;                                [11-13]
SVF 2.54) What the difference is between
the presentation, the presented object,
the 'phantastic', and the phantasm.
   1. Chrysippus says that these four things differ from each other.
Presentation, then, is an experience which occurs in the soul and which,
in [the experience] itself, also indicates that which caused it. For example,
when we observe something white by means of vision, there is an experi-
ence which has occurred in the soul by means of vision; and <in virtue
of> this experience we are able to say that there exists something white
which stimulates us. And similarly for touch and smell.
   2. Presentation [phantasia] gets its name from light [phos ]; for just as
light reveals itself and the other things which are encompassed in it, so
too presentation reveals itself and that which caused it.
   3. The presented object is that which causes the presentation. For
example, the presented object is the white and the cold, and everything
which is able to stimulate the soul.
   4. The 'phantastic' is a groundless attraction, an experience in the soul
which occurs as the result of no presented object, as in the case of people
who fight with shadows and punch at thin air. For a presented object
underlies the presentation, but no presented object [underlies] the 'phan-
tastic'.
   5. A phantasm is that to which we are attracted in the 'phantastic'
130                                                                      l/-13 to l/-19

groundless attraction. This occurs in the melancholic 17 and in mad men;
at any rate when Orestes in the tragedy 18 says,

           Mother! I beg you, do not shake at me
           those bloody, snakelike maidens!
           They, they are leaping at me!

he says this like a madman, and sees nothing, but only thinks that he
does. 6. That is why Electra says to him,

           Stay, poor wretch, peacefully in your bed;
           for you see none of those things which you think you clearly
           know.

Similarly, there is Theoclymenus in Homer. 19

Pseudo-Galen Medical Definitions 126                                               [11-14]
(19.381 K. = SVF 2.89)
   A conception is a stored-up thought, and a thought is a rational presen-
tation.

Augustine City ofGod 8.7 (SVF 2.106)                                               [11-15]
   ... those who placed the criterion of truth in the bodily senses, and
thought that every object of learning should be measured by their stan-
dards, like the Epicureans and all others of the sort, including even the
Stoics. For although they passionately loved the skill of debating, which
they call dialectic, they thought it should be derived from the bodily
senses, asserting that it was from this source that the soul acquired
conceptions, which they call ennoiai, i.e., those things which are clarified
by definition; from this source (they said) the entire system of teaching
and learning is generated and the links within it are forged.

Origen Against Celsus 7.37 (SVF 2.108)                                             [11-16]
  ... [Celsus] dogmatically asserts, like the Stoics who abolish intelligible
substances, that everything which is grasped is grasped by the senses
and every act of [mental] grasping is dependent on the senses ....

17. Those affected by an excess of black bile, not the melancholic in our sense.
18. Euripides Orestes 255-259.
19. Odyssey 20.350 ff.
Logic and Theory of Knowledge                                            131
Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions 1037b                             [11-17]
(SVF 2.129)
   Having said in his book On the Use ofArgument that one must not use
the power of argument for inappropriate ends, just as is the case with
weapons, he [Chrysippus] said this in addition: "One must use it for the
discovery of truths and for coordinated training in them, but not for the
opposite purposes, although many do this". By "many" he presumably
means those who suspend judgement [i.e., sceptics].

Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions                                   [11-18]
1035f-1036a (SVF 2.127)
   (1035f) ... He [Chrysippus] says that he does not absolutely reject
arguments to opposite conclusions, but he does advise that this technique
be used with caution, as in the law courts-(1036a) not with a sense
of advocacy but to dissolve the plausibility of these arguments. "It is
appropriate," he says, "for those who urge suspension of judgement on
all things to do this, and it is helpful for their aim. But for those who
work to produce knowledge according to which we may live consistently,
the opposite is appropriate, to give instruction in basic principles to
beginners, from beginning to end. In this context it is timely to mention
the opposite arguments too, dissolving their plausibility just as in the
law courts."

Sextus M 7.440-442 (SVF 2.118)                                       [11-19]

   440. But in reply the dogmatists are accustomed to ask how the sceptic
can ever show that there is no criterion. For he says this either without
a criterion or with one. If without a criterion he will be untrustworthy;
and if with a criterion he will be turned upside down; while saying
that there is no criterion he will concede that he accepts a criterion to
establish this.
   441. And we in turn ask, "if there is a criterion, has it been judged
[by a criterion] or not?"; and we conclude one of two things: either that
there is an infinite regress or that, absurdly, something is said to be its
own criterion. Then they say in reply that it is not absurd to allow that
something is its own criterion. 442. For the straight is the standard for
itself and other things and a set of scales establishes the equality of other
things and of itself and light seems to reveal not just other things but
also itself. Therefore, the criterion can be the criterion both of other
things and of itself.
132                                                                   l/-20


Physics
Diogenes Laertius 7.132-160                                         [11-20]
   132. They divide the account of physics into topics on bodies and on
principles and elements and gods and limits and place and void. And
this is the detailed division; the general division is into three topics,
concerning the cosmos, concerning the elements and the third on
causal explanation.
   They say that the topic concerning the cosmos is divided into two
parts; for the mathematicians share in one branch of its investigations,
the one in which they investigate the fixed stars and the planets, for
example, [to ascertain] whether the sun is as big as it appears to be, and
similarly if the moon is; and concerning the revolution [of the cosmos]
and similar enquiries.
   133. The other branch of the investigation of the cosmos is the one
which pertains only to natural scientists, the one in which the substance
[of the cosmos] is investigated and whether it is generated or ungenerated
and whether it is alive or lifeless and whether it is destructible or inde-
structible and whether it is administered by providence; and so forth.
   The topic concerning causal explanations is itself also bipartite. For
medical investigation shares in one branch of its investigations, the one
in which they investigate the leading part of the soul, what happens in
the soul, the [generative] seeds, and questions like these. The mathemati-
cians also lay claim on the other, for example, [investigation into] how
we see, into the cause of how things appear in a mirror, how clouds
are formed, and thunder and rainbows and the halo and comets and
similar topics.
   134. They believe that there are two principles of the universe, the
active and the passive. The passive, then, is unqualified substance, i.e.,
matter, while the active is the rational principle [logos] in it, i.e., god.
For he, being eternal and [penetrating] all of matter, is the craftsman of
all things. Zeno of Citium propounds this doctrine in his On Substance,
Cleanthes in his On Atoms, Chrysippus towards the end of book one of
his Physics, Archedemus in his On Elements and Posidonius in book two
of his Account of Physics. They say that there is a difference between
principles and elements. For the former are ungenerated and indestructi-
ble, while the elements are destroyed in the [universal] conflagration.
And the principles are bodies 20 and without form, while the elements are
endowed with form.

20. So the mss; some editors prefer the emendation "incorporeal".
Physics                                                                   133

   135. According to Apollodorus in his Physics, body is that which is
extended in three [dimensions], length, breadth and depth; this is also
called solid body; surface is the limit of a body or that which has only
length and breadth, but no depth; Posidonius, in book 5 of his On
Meteorological Phenomena, says that it exists both in conception and in
reality. A line is the limit of a surface or a length with no breadth, or
that which has only length. A point is the limit of a line, and it is the
smallest [possible] mark.
   God and mind and fate and Zeus are one thing, but called by many
different names. 136. In the beginning, then, he was by himself and
turned all substance into water via air; and just as the seed is contained
in the seminal fluid, so this, being the spermatic principle of the cosmos,
remains like this in the fluid and makes the matter easy for itself to work
with in the generation of subsequent things. Then, it produces first the
four elements, fire, water, air, earth. And Zeno discusses this in his On
the Universe and Chrysippus [does so] in book one of his Physics and
Archedemus in some work entitled On Elements.
   An element is that from which generated things are first generated
and that into which they are dissolved in the end. 137. The four elements
together are unqualified substance, i.e., matter; and fire is the hot, water
the wet, air the cold, and earth the dry. Nevertheless, there is still in
the air the same part. Anyway, fire is the highest, and this is called aither;
in this is produced first the sphere of the fixed stars, and then the sphere
of the planets. Next comes the air, then the water, and, as the foundation
for everything, the earth, which is in the middle of absolutely everything.
   They use the term 'cosmos' in three senses: [1] the god himself who
is the individual quality consisting of the totality of substance, who is
indestructible and ungenerated, being the craftsman of the organization,
taking substance as a totality back into himself in certain [fixed] temporal
cycles, and again generating it out of himself; 138. [2] they also call the
organization itself of the stars cosmos; and [3] thirdly, that which is
composed of both.
   And the cosmos in the sense of the individual quality of the substance
of the universe is either, as Posidonius says in his Elements of the Study
of Meteorological Phenomena, a complex of heaven and earth and the
natures in them, or a complex of gods and men and the things which
come to be for their sake. Heaven is the outermost periphery in which
everything divine is located.
   The cosmos is administered by mind and providence (as Chrysippus
says in book five of his On Providence and Posidonius in book thirteen
of his On Gods), since mind penetrates every part of it just as soul does
us. But it penetrates some things more than others. 139. For it penetrates
134                                                                     l/-20

some as a condition [hexis], for example, bones and sinews, and others
as mind, for example, the leading part of the soul. In this way the entire
cosmos too, being an animal and alive and rational, has aither as its
leading part, as Antipater of Tyre [says] in book eight of his On the
Cosmos. Chrysippus in book one of his On Providence and Posidonius in
his On Gods say that the heaven is the leading part of the cosmos, while
Cleanthes says it is the sun. Chrysippus, however, in the same work,
again somewhat differently, says it is the purest part of the aither, which
they also call the first god in a perceptible sense, [saying also] that it, as
it were, penetrates the things in the air and all the animals and plants;
and [it penetrates] even the earth in the form of a condition.
    140. [They say] that the cosmos is one, and limited at that, having a
spherical shape; for that sort of thing is most fit for movement, as
Posidonius, in book five of his Account of Physics, and the followers of
Antipater, in their treatises on the cosmos, say.
    Spread around the outside of it is the unlimited void, which is incorpo-
real. And the void 21 is what can be occupied by bodies but is not occupied.
Inside the cosmos there is no void, but it is [fully] unified. For this is
necessitated by the sympathy and common tension of heavenly things in
relation to earthly things. Chrysippus speaks about the void in his On
Void and in the first of his Arts of Physics and [so do] Apollophanes in
his Physics and Posidonius in book two of his Account of Physics.
   Things said [lekta] 22 are incorporeal in the same way. 141. Again, so
too is time an incorporeal, being the interval of the movement of the
cosmos. Of time, the past and future are unlimited, while the present is
limited. They believe too that the cosmos is destructible, on the grounds
that it is generated; <and> 23 on the basis of <this> argument: in the case
of things conceived of by sense-perception, that whose parts are destructi-
ble is also destructible as a whole; but the parts of the cosmos are
destructible, since they change into each other; therefore, the cosmos is
destructible. And if something is capable of change for the worse, it is
destructible; and the cosmos is [capable of such change], since it is dried
out and flooded.
    142. The cosmos comes into being when substance turns from fire
through air to moisture, and then the thick part of it is formed into earth
and the thin part is rarefied and this when made even more thin produces
fire. Then by a mixing from these are made plants and animals and the
rest of the [natural] kinds. Zeno, then, speaks about the generation and

21. An emendation for the repeated "incorporeal".
22. An emendation for "These things".
23. The supplements are by Michael Frede.
Physics                                                                  135

destruction in his On the Universe, Chrysippus in book one of the Physics,
Posidonius in book one of his On the Cosmos, and [so does] Cleanthes
and [also] Antipater in book ten of his On the Cosmos. Panaetius, though,
claims that the cosmos is indestructible.
   Chrysippus in book one of On Providence, Apollodorus in his Physics
and Posidonius say that the cosmos is also an animal, rational and alive
and intelligent; 143. an animal in the sense that it is a substance which
is alive and capable of sense-perception. For an animal is better than a
non-animal; and nothing is better than the cosmos; therefore, the cosmos
is an animal. And [it is] alive, as is clear from the fact that the soul of
[each of] us is a fragment derived from it. Boethus says that the cosmos
is not an animal. And Zeno says that it is one in his On the Universe,
and so do Chrysippus and Apollodorus in his Physics and Posidonius in
book one of his Account ofPhysics. According to Apollodorus, the totality
is said to be the cosmos, and in another sense it is said to be the composite
system of the cosmos and the void outside it. Anyway, the cosmos is
limited and the void is unlimited.
    144. The fixed stars are carried around with the entire heaven, and
the planets move with their own unique motions. The sun makes its
elliptical journey through the circle of the zodiac; similarly, the moon
makes its journey in a spiral And the sun is pure fire, as Posidonius says
in book seven of On Meteorological Phenomena; and it is bigger than the
earth, as the same [philosopher] says in book six of his Account ofPhysics;
and it is also spherical, as the followers of this same man say, just like
the cosmos. So [they say] it is fire, because it does everything that fire
does; and that it is bigger than the earth, because the entire earth is
illuminated by it-but so is the heaven. And the fact that the earth
produces a conical shadow also shows that [the sun] is bigger; and because
of its size it is seen from all over [the earth].
    145. The moon is more like the earth, since it is closer to the earth.
And these fiery [phenomena] and the other stars are nourished, the sun
[being nourished] by the great sea, as it is an intelligent kindling [of its
exhalations]; and the moon [is nourished] by bodies of potable water,
since it is mixed with air and is closer to the earth, as Posidonius says
in book six of his Account of Physics; the others [are nourished] by the
earth. [The Stoics] believe that both the stars and the immovable earth
are spherical. The moon does not have its own light, but receives its
light from the sun by being shone upon.
   The sun is eclipsed when the moon covers it on the side which is
towards us, as Zeno writes in his On the Universe. 146. For at the
conjunctions it [the moon] is seen gradually to approach [the sun] and
to occlude it and then to pass by. This is observed in a pan of water.
136                                                                     l/-20

And the moon [is eclipsed] when it falls into the earth's shadow; and
that is why there is only an eclipse at the full moon. Although [the moon]
is diametrically opposite to the sun once a month, because it moves in
[an orbit which is] oblique with relation to the sun's, it [usually] diverges
in latitude [and so is not eclipsed every month], being either too far to
the north or too far to the south. But it is eclipsed whenever its latitude
lines up with that of the sun and the ecliptic and is then diametrically
opposite to the sun. And its latitude lines up with that of the ecliptic in
Cancer, Scorpio, Aries and Taurus, as the followers of Posidonius say.
   147. God is an animal, immortal, rational, perfect24 in happiness, im-
mune to everything bad, providentially [looking after] the cosmos and
the things in the cosmos; but he is not anthropomorphic. [God] is the
craftsman of the universe and as it were a father of all things, both in
general and also that part of him which extends through everything; he
is called by many names in accordance with its powers. 25 They say that
Dia [a grammatical form of the name Zeus] is the one 'because of whom'
all things are; they call [god] Zena [a grammatical form of the name
Zeus] in so far as he is cause of life or because he penetrates life; and
Athena by reference to the fact that his leading part extends into the
aither; Hera because he extends into the air; Hephaestus because he
extends into craftsmanlike fire; Poseidon because he extends into the
fluid; and Demeter because he extends into the earth. Similarly they also
assign the other titles [to god] by fastening onto one [of his] peculiarities.
   148. Zeno says that the entire cosmos and the heaven are the substance
of god, and so does Chrysippus in book one of his On Gods and Posidonius
in book one of On Gods. And Antipater, in book seven of On the Cosmos,
says that his substance is airy. Boethus [says] in his On Nature that the
sphere of the fixed stars is the substance of god.
   Sometimes they explain 'nature' as that which holds the cosmos to-
gether, and other times as that which makes things on earth grow. And
nature is a condition which moves from itself, producing and holding
together the things it produces at definite times, according to spermatic
principles, and making things which are of the same sort as that from
which they were separated. 149. They say that this [i.e., nature] aims at
both the advantageous and at pleasure, as is clear from the craftsmanlike
[structure or activity] of man.
   Chrysippus says, in his On Fate, that everything happens by fate, and
so does Posidonius in book two of On Fate, and Zeno, and Boethus in
book one of On Fate. Fate is a continuous string of causes of things

24. We excise the words "or intelligent" as a gloss.
25. The etymologies which follow involve untranslatable word plays.
Physics                                                                  137

which exist, or a rational principle according to which the cosmos is
managed. Moreover, they say that all of prophecy is real, if providence
too exists; and they even declare that it is a craft, on the grounds that
sometimes it turns out [true], as Zeno says, and Chrysippus in book two
of his On Prophecy and Athenodorus and Posidonius in book twelve of
his Account of Physics and in book five of his On Prophecy. Panaetius,
though, denies the reality of prophecy.
    150. They say that primary matter is the substance of all things which
exist, as Chrysippus says in book one of his Physics and [so too does]
Zeno. Matter is that from which anything at all can come into being.
And it has two names, 'substance' and 'matter', both as the matter of all
things [as a whole], and as the matter of individual things. The matter
of all things [as a whole] does not become greater or smaller, but the
matter of the individual things does. Substance is, according to the Stoics,
body, and it is limited, according to Anti pater in book two of On Substance
and Apollodorus in his Physics. And it is capable of being affected, as
the same man says; for if it were immune to change, the things generated
from it would not be generated. From this it follows that [matter] can
be divided to infinity. Chrysippus says that this division is infinite, <but
not to infinity>; for there is no infinity for the division to reach; rather,
the division is unceasing.
    151. As Chrysippus says in book three of the Physics, mixtures are
total and not a matter of being surrounded or being juxtaposed. For a
bit of wine thrown into the sea is for a certain time extended through it
reciprocally; but then it is destroyed into it.
   And they say that there also exist daimons who have a sympathy with
men and are overseers of human affairs; and the surviving souls of virtuous
men are heroes.
   Of things which occur in the [region of the] air, they say that winter
is the air above the earth cooled by the withdrawal of the sun; and spring
is the temperate blend of the air which is a result of the [sun's] journey
towards us; 152. summer is the air above the earth warmed by the jour-
ney of the sun towards the north; and fall is caused by the return journey
of the sun away from us. <The winds are flows of the air; they have
different names> in accordance with the regions from which they flow.
The cause of the generation of [the winds] is the sun's evaporation of
the clouds. The rainbow is a refraction of the rays [of light] from moist
clouds, or as Posidonius says in his Meteorological Phenomena, a reflection
(which appears rounded in a circle) of a portion of the sun or moon in
a moist and hollow cloud, continuous in its presentation. Comets and
'bearded' stars and 'torch' stars are fires which come into existence when
thick air is borne up to the region of aither. 153. A meteor is a kindled
138                                                              l/-20 to l/-21

mass of fire moving quickly in the air, creating the presentation [i.e.,
appearance] of length. Rain is a change from cloud to water, when
moisture is borne up from earth or sea and is not consumed by the sun.
When it is cooled, it is called frost. Hail is a frozen cloud broken up by
the wind. Snow is moisture from a frozen cloud, as Posidonius says in
book eight of his Account of Physics. Lightning is a kindling of clouds
which are rubbed together or broken by the wind, as Zeno says in his
On the Universe. Thunder is the noise produced by these [clouds] when
they are rubbed together or broken. 154. A thunderbolt is a vigorous
kindling of clouds which falls on the earth with great violence when
clouds are rubbed together or broken by the wind. Others say it is a
compacted mass of fiery air which descends violently. A typhoon is a
great thunderbolt, violent and windlike, or a wind like smoke from a
broken cloud. A tornado is a cloud split by fire together with wind.
<Earthquakes occur when wind flows> into the hollows of the earth, or
when wind is closed up in the earth, as Posidonius says in book eight.
Some of them are 'shaking' [earthquakes], some 'openings', some 'slip-
pings', and others are 'bubblings'.
   155. They believe that the organization is like this: in the middle is
earth, playing the role of centre, after which is water spherically arranged
with the same centre as the earth so that the earth is inside the water.
After water is a sphere of air. There are five circles in the heaven; of
these the first, the arctic, is always apparent; the second is the summer
tropic; the third is the equinoctial circle; the fourth the winter tropic;
the fifth is the antarctic, which is invisible. They are called parallels in
that they do not converge; still, they are inscribed about a common
centre. The zodiacal [circle] is oblique, since it crosses the parallel circles.
There are five zones on the earth; 156. the first is the northern zone,
beyond the arctic circle, uninhabited because of the cold; the second is
temperate; the third is uninhabited because of scorching heat and is called
the torrid zone; the fourth is the counter-temperate; the fifth is the
southern, uninhabited because of cold.
   They believe that nature is a craftsmanlike fire, proceeding methodi-
cally to generation, i.e., a fiery and craftsmanly pneuma. And soul is a
<nature> capable of sense perception. And this [soul] is the inborn pneuma
in us. Therefore, it is a body and lasts after death. It is destructible, but
the soul of the universe, of which the souls in animals are parts, is
indestructible. 157. Zeno of Citium and Antipater in their treatises On
the Soul and Posidonius [say] that the soul is a warm pneuma. For by
means of this we live and breathe and by this we are moved. So Cleanthes
says that all [souls] last until <the> conflagration, but Chrysippus says
that only those of the wise do so.
Physics                                                                    139

   They say that there are eight parts of the soul, the five senses, the
spermatic principles in us, the vocal part and the reasoning part. We see
when the light which is the medium between the [power of] vision and
the external object is tensed in a conical fashion, as Chrysippus, in book
two of his Physics, and Apollodorus say. The conical part of the [tensed]
air meets our visual organ, and its base meets the object seen. So the
observed object is 'announced' [to us] by the tensed air, just as [the
ground is revealed to a blind man] by his walking stick. 158. We hear
when the air which is the medium between the speaker and the hearer
is struck in spherical fashion, and then forms waves and strikes our
auditory organs, just as the water in a cistern forms circular waves when
a stone is thrown into it. Sleep occurs when the perceptual tension is
relaxed in the region of the leading part of the soul. They say that
alterations of the pneuma are the causes of the passions. They say that a
seed is that which is able to generate other things which are of the same
sort as that from which it itself [the seed] was separated. Human seed,
which a human emits together with a moist [carrier], is blended with the
parts of the soul in a mixture of the [spermatic or rational] principles of
his ancestors. 159. In book two of his Physics Chrysippus says that it is
pneuma in its substance, as is clear from seeds which are sown in the
earth: when they get old they no longer germinate, obviously because
their potency has evaporated. And the followers of Sphaerus say that the
seed is derived from the whole body; at any rate, [the seed] is able to
generate all the parts of the body. But they claim that the [seed] of the
female is sterile; for it lacks tension, is limited in quantity, and is watery,
as Sphaerus says. And the leading part is the most authoritative [or:
dominant] part in the soul; in it occur the presentations and impulses,
and from it rational discourse is emitted. It is in the heart.
   160. These are their physical doctrines, as far as seems sufficient for
us [to relate], keeping in view [the need for] due symmetry in [the plan
of] my work ....

The Hymn to Zeus by Cleanthes (Stobaeus                                [11-21]
Anthology 1.1.12 p. 25.3-27.4; SVF 1.537)

          Most glorious of the immortals, called by many names, ever
             all-mighty
          Zeus, leader of nature, guiding everything with law,
          Hail! For it is right that all mortals should address you,
          since all are descended from you and imitate your voice,
          alone of all the mortals which live and creep upon the earth.
          So I will sing your praises and hymn your might always.
140                                                      l/-21 to l/-23

      This entire cosmos which revolves around the earth obeys
          you,
      wherever you might lead it, and is willingly ruled by you;
      such is [the might of] your thunderbolt, a two-edged helper
      in your invincible hands, fiery and everliving;
      for by its blows all deeds in nature are <accomplished>.
      By it you straighten the common rational principle which
          penetrates
      all things, being mixed with lights both great and small.
      By it you have become such a lofty power and king forever.
      Nor does any deed occur on earth without you, god,
      neither in the aithereal divine heaven nor on the sea,
      except for the deeds of the wicked in their folly.
      But you know how to set straight what is crooked,
      and to put in order what is disorderly; for you, what is not
          dear is dear.
      For thus you have fitted together all good things with the
          bad,
      so that there is one eternal rational principle for them all-
      and it is this which the wicked flee from and neglect,
      ill-fated, since they always long for the possession of good
          things
      and do not see the common law of god, nor do they hear it;
      and if they obeyed it sensibly they would have a good life.
      But fools they be, impelled each to his own evil,
      some with a strife-torn zeal for glory,
      others devoted to gain in undue measure,
      others devoted to release and the pleasures of the body .
      . . . they are swept off in pursuit of different things at
          different times
      while rushing to acquire the exact opposites of these things
          above all.
      But Zeus, giver of all, you of the dark clouds, of the blazing
          thunderbolt,
      save men from their baneful inexperience
      and disperse it, father, far from their souls; grant that they
          may achieve
      the wisdom with which you confidently guide all with justice
      so that we may requite you with honour for the honour you
          give us
      praising your works continually, as is fitting
      for mortals; for there is no greater prize, neither for mortals
Physics                                                                   141

          nor for gods, than to praise with justice the common law for
            ever.

From another hymn by Cleanthes: Epictetus                             [11-22]
Enchiridion 53 (SVF 1.527)

          Lead me, 0 Zeus, and you 0 Fate,
          to whatever place you have assigned me;
          I shall follow without reluctance, and if I am not willing to,
          because I have become a bad man, nevertheless I will follow.

Cicero On the Nature ofthe Gods 2                                     [11-23]
(selections)
   3. Then Balbus [the Stoic] said, "I shall indulge you, and deal with
things as briefly as I can; indeed, once one has exposed the errors of
Epicurus my speech is stripped of all [excuse for] length. Our school
exhaustively divides this whole question about the immortal gods into
four parts: first they teach that there are gods, then what they are like,
then that the cosmos is governed by them, and finally that they take
thought for the affairs of human beings ....
   4. Then Lucilius [Balbus] said, "The first part hardly even seems to
require discussion. For what is so obvious or clear, when we have gazed
up at the heaven and contemplated the heavenly bodies, as that there
exists some divine power of most exceptional intelligence by which these
phenomena are governed? ... If someone were to doubt this, I do not
at all understand why the same fellow could not also doubt whether there
is a sun or not; 5. for how is this any more evident than that? And unless
[such a conception] were known and grasped in our minds, our opinion
would not persist in such a stable fashion, nor would it be confirmed by
the passage of time, nor could it have become fixed as the centuries and
generations of mankind passed. We notice that other opinions, which are
ungrounded and empty, have faded away with the passage of time ....
   . . . 12. Augurs have great authority; is the craft of the soothsayers not
divine? Is not someone who witnesses these things [cases of successful
prediction] and countless others of the same sort not compelled to admit
that there are gods? For it is certainly necessary, if there are spokesmen
for certain beings, that those beings themselves exist; but there are spokes-
men for the gods; let us, therefore, admit that there are gods. But perhaps
not all predictions are fulfilled. Well, just because not all sick men recover
it does not follow that there is no craft of medicine. Signs of future
events are shown by the gods; if some people make mistakes in [interpre-
142                                                                    l/-23

ting] them, it is not the nature of the gods which erred, but human in-
ference.
   And so the general issue is agreed upon by all people of all nations;
for in the minds of all there is an inborn and, as it were, engraved
[conviction] that there are gods. 13. There is disagreement about what
they are like, but no one denies that they exist. Cleanthes, [a leader of]
our [school] said that four causes accounted for the formation of concep-
tions of the gods in the minds of men. First, he cited the cause I was
just mentioning, which is derived from the premonition of future events;
second, one we have derived from the magnitude of the benefits we
receive from our temperate climate, the fertility of the land and the
bounty of many other benefits; 14. third, one which strikes fear into our
minds because of thunderbolts, storms, cloudbursts, snowstorms, hail,
natural devastation, plagues, earthquakes and underground rumblings,
showers of stones and blood-coloured raindrops, and monstrosities which
violate nature, whether human or animal, and flashes of light seen in the
sky, and the stars which the Greeks call 'comets' and we [Romans] call
'curly-haired' [stars] ... when frightened by these men came to believe
that there is a certain divine power in the heavens; 15. the fourth cause,
and also the most effective, is the regularity of the motions and revolutions
of the heaven, and the distinctive and varied, yet orderly beauty of the
sun, moon and all the stars; just looking at them indicates clearly enough
that these things are not the result of chance. When someone goes
into a house or gymnasium or public forum and sees the orderliness of
everything, and its regularity and systematic character, he cannot judge
that these things happen with no cause, but he understands that there
is someone who is in charge and runs things; in the same way, but much
more so, in the midst of so many motions and changes, and the orderly
patterns of so many things of such great size which since the beginning
of time have never belied themselves, one must decide that natural mo-
tions on such a scale are governed by some intelligence.
   16. For all his intellectual acuity, Chrysippus nevertheless puts these
points in such a way that they seem to be the teachings of nature and
not his own discoveries. "If," he says, "there is something in nature
which the human mind, reason, strength and power cannot accomplish,
then certainly that which does accomplish it is better than man; but the
heavenly bodies and everything which is part of the eternal natural order
cannot be created by man; therefore, that by which they are created is
better than man; but what would you call this thing if not god? Indeed,
if there are no gods, what can there be in nature which is better than
man? For reason exists in man alone, and there is nothing more splendid
than that; but it is arrogant lunacy for there to be a man who supposes
Physics                                                                  143

that there is nothing in the whole cosmos better than he; therefore, there
is something better; therefore, obviously, there is a god."
   17. If you see a large and beautiful house, you could not be induced
to think that it was built by mice and polecats, even if you do not see
the master of the house. If, then, you were to think that the great ornament
of the cosmos, the great variety and beauty of the heavenly bodies, the
great power and vastness of the sea and land, were your own house and
not that of the immortal gods, would you not seem to be downright
crazy? Or do we not understand even this, that everything above is better
and that the earth is in the lowest position and is surrounded by the
densest form of air? As a result, for the same reason that applies when
we observe that some regions and cities have duller-witted inhabitants
because of the more congested nature of their climatic conditions, the
human race too is afflicted by this because men are located on the earth,
i.e., in the densest part of the universe. 18. And yet, we ought to infer
from the very cleverness of man that there is some intelligence [in the
universe as a whole], indeed one which is more acute and divine. For
where did man 'snatch' his own intelligence from (as Socrates puts it in
Xenophon)? 26 Indeed, if someone were to inquire about the source of the
moisture and heat which is distributed throughout our bodies, and of
the earthy solidity of our organs, and finally about [the source of] the
air-like spirit [i.e., pneuma] which we have, it appears that we derived
one from the earth, another from the moisture, another from fire, and
another from the air which we inhale as we breathe. But the most
important of these, I mean reason and (if it is all right to use a number
of words) intelligence, planning, thought and prudence, where did we
find this? where did we derive it from? Or does earth have all the rest
and not have this one thing which is of the highest value? And yet, it is
certain that nothing at all is superior to or more beautiful than the cosmos;
and not only is there nothing better, but nothing can even be conceived
of which is better. And if nothing is better than reason and wisdom, it
is necessary that these be present in that which we have granted to be
the best.
   19. What? Who is not compelled to accept what I say by [consideration
of] the tremendous sympathy, agreement and interconnected relation-
ships [of the cosmos]? Could the earth bloom at one time, and be barren
at another in turn? Could the approach and retreat of the sun at the
summer and winter solstices be known by the manifold changes of things?
Could the sea tides in channels and straits be moved by the risings and
settings of the moon? Or could the variable orbits of the heavenly bodies

26. Memorabilia 1.4.8.
144                                                                                l/-23

be maintained despite the uniform revolution of the entire heavens?
These things, and the mutual harmony of the parts of the cosmos,
certainly could not happen as they do unless they were bound together
by one divine and continuously connected pneumaY
   20. When these doctrines are expounded in a fuller and more flowing
fashion, as I intend to do, they more easily escape the captious criticisms
of the Academy; but when they are demonstrated in the manner of Zeno,
in shorter and more cramped syllogisms, then they are more open to
attack; for just as a flowing river is virtually free of the risk of pollution
while a confined body of water is polluted quite readily, in the same way
the reproaches of a critic are diluted by a flowing oration while a cramped
syllogistic demonstration cannot easily protect itself.
   Zeno used to compress the arguments which we expand upon, in the
following manner. 21. "That which is rational is better than that which
is not rational; but nothing is better than the cosmos; therefore, the
cosmos is rational." It can be proven in a similar manner that the cosmos
is wise, happy and eternal, since all of these are better than things which
lack them, and nothing is better than the world. From all of this it will
be proven that the cosmos is a god. Zeno also used this argument: 22.
"If something lacks the ability to perceive, no part of it can have the
ability to perceive; but some parts of the cosmos have the ability to
perceive; therefore, the cosmos does not lack the ability to perceive." He
goes on and presses his point even more compactly. He says, "nothing
which lacks life and reason can produce from itself something which is
alive and rational; but the cosmos produces from itself things which are
alive and rational; therefore, the cosmos is alive and rational." He also
argues by means of a comparison, as he often does, as follows: "If flutes
playing tunefully grew on olive trees, surely you would not doubt that
the olive tree possessed some knowledge of flute playing? What if plane
trees bore lyres playing melodiously? surely you would also decide that
there was musical ability in plane trees. Why, then, is the cosmos not
judged to be alive and wise, when it produces from itself creatures which
are alive and wise?"
   23. But since I have already begun to digress from the mode of discus-
sion which I announced at the beginning-for I said that this first part
of [our theme] did not require discussion, since it was obvious to everyone
that there are gods-well, despite this I want to support the same point
by proofs drawn from physics, i.e., from the study of nature. For the

27. Cicero uses the term spiritus, but the Greek term he has in mind is obviously pneuma,
which has been transliterated where it occurs in Greek sources. Similarly, Cicero's mundus
has been rendered by 'cosmos' for the sake of uniformity with the Greek sources.
Physics                                                                  145

fact is that everything which is nourished and grows contains within
itself a large measure of heat, without which these things could neither
be nourished nor grow. For everything which is warm and fiery is set
going and kept in motion by its own characteristic motion; but that which
is nourished and grows makes use of a certain definite and regular motion;
as long as this remains in us our power of sense-perception and life
remains, but when this heat is cooled and extinguished, then we ourselves
die and are extinguished. 24. On this point, Cleanthes also uses these
arguments to show how great is the power of heat in every body. He
says that there is no food which is so heavy that it cannot be digested 28
within a night and a day, and even the residues of the food, which are
naturally eliminated, contain heat. Moreover, the veins and arteries do
not cease to pulsate with a certain flame-like motion; and it has often
been observed that when some animal's heart is removed it continues to
beat as rapidly as a flickering flame. Therefore, everything which lives,
whether an animal or a vegetable, lives because of the heat contained
within it. From this one should understand that the nature of heat has
within itself the power of life which penetrates the entire cosmos.
   25. This will be easier to see if we give a more detailed account of
this all-pervasive fiery stuff as a whole. All parts of the cosmos (though
I will only deal with the most important parts) are supported and sustained
by heat. This can be seen first in the nature of earth. For we see that
fire is produced when stones are struck or rubbed together, and when a
hole has just been dug we see 'the warm earth steaming'; and warm water
is drawn even from spring-fed wells, especially in winter, because the
hollow parts of the earth contain a great deal of heat and in winter [the
earth] is denser and so confines the heat which is native to it more tightly.
26. It could be shown, by a long discourse and many arguments, that all
the seeds which the earth receives and all the plants which are generated
from her and which she holds rooted in her are born and grow because
of her temperate heat.
   And that heat is also blended with water is shown first of all by the
fluidity of water, which would neither be frozen by the cold nor solidified
into snow and frost if it did not also dissolve and liquify itself when heat
is added. Thus moisture hardens when it is affected by the blasts of the
north wind and other sources of cold, and in turn is softened when
warmed and is [even] dried up by heat. Even the seas, when tossed by
the winds, warm up to such an extent that one can easily see that heat
is enclosed in these vast bodies of water; and one must not suppose that
the warmth in question comes from some external and extraneous source,

28. The word literally means 'cooked'; hence the point about heat.
146                                                                  l/-23

but rather that it is stirred up by the [wind-induced] motion from the
deepest parts of the sea. This also happens to our own bodies, when they
warm up with motion and exercise.
   Air itself, which is by nature the coldest [element], is hardly devoid
of heat. 27. Indeed, it is mixed with a very great deal of heat, since it
arises from the evaporation of bodies of water and air should be held to
be a kind of vapour arising from them; anyway, air comes to be as a
result of the motion of the heat contained in bodies of water. We can
see something like this when water is brought to a boil by putting a fire
beneath it.
   What now remains is the fourth part of the cosmos; it itself is in its
entirety a hot nature and it communicates its salutary and life-giving
heat to all other natures. 28. From this it is argued that, since all the
parts of the cosmos are sustained by heat, that the cosmos itself is
preserved for an immense time by an exactly similarly nature, all the
more so since one ought to understand that this hot and fiery nature is
blended throughout all of nature in such a way that it contains in itself
the procreative power and cause of generation; all animals and everything
which is rooted in the earth must be born from and nourished by this
[principle of heat].
   29. There is, therefore, a nature which holds the entire cosmos together
and preserves it, and which is endowed with sense-perception and reason.
For every nature which is not isolated and simple, but rather is joined
and connected with something else, must have in itself some 'leading
part', like the mind in man and in a brute beast something analogous to
mind which is the source of its desires for things; in trees and plants
which grow in the earth the leading part is thought to reside in their
roots. By 'leading part' I mean that which the Greeks call hegemonikon;
in each type of thing there cannot and should not be anything more
excellent than this. Necessarily, then, that in which the leading part of
nature as a whole resides must be the best of all, and the most worthy
of power and authority over all things. 30. We see, moreover, that the
parts of the cosmos (and there is nothing in the whole cosmos which is
not a part of the whole) contain the powers of sense-perception and
reason. These powers must, then, be present in that part of the cosmos
which contains its leading part-and in a more acute and powerful form.
That is why the cosmos must be wise and why the nature which contains
in its grasp all things must surpass them in the perfection of its reason;
so the cosmos is a god and all the powers of the cosmos are held together
by the divine nature ....
   32 .... One can also see that the cosmos contains intelligence from
the fact that it is without doubt better than any other nature. Just as
Physics                                                                     147

there is no part of our body which is not of less value than we ourselves
are, so the cosmos as a whole must be of more value than any part of it;
but if this is so, the cosmos must necessarily be wise, for if it were not,
then man, who is a part of the cosmos, would have to be of more value
than the entire cosmos in virtue of his participation in reason.
   33. And if we want to proceed from primary and rudimentary natures
to those which are highest and perfect, it is necessary that we arrive at
the nature of the gods. We notice first that nature sustains things produced
from the earth, to whom she gave nothing more than the ability to nourish
themselves and to grow. 34. But she gave to beasts the powers of sense-
perception and motion and the ability to use a kind of impulse to acquire
beneficial things and avoid dangerous things. Her gifts to man were
greater in that she added reason, by which the soul's impulses could be
governed by being alternately set loose and restrained. The fourth and
highest level belongs to those who are by nature born good and wise,
those in whom right and consistent reason is inborn from the very
beginning. This kind of reason must be thought of as beyond human
capacity and should be assigned to a god, i.e., the cosmos, which must
necessarily contain that perfected and completed form of reason.
   35. Nor can one say that in any complex system ultimate perfection
does not occur. In the case of vines or cattle we see that, unless some
[external] force interferes, nature follows its own path to its final goal;
in painting, building and the other crafts we can point to the completion
of a perfect piece of workmanship; similarly, (but much more so) it is
necessary that something be completed and perfected in nature as a
whole. Indeed, other natures can be prevented by many external factors
from achieving perfection, but nature as a whole cannot be hindered by
anything, for the very reason that it itself embraces and contains all
[other] natures. That is why it is necessary that there be this fourth and
highest level which is immune to all outside force. 36. It is on this level
that we find the nature of the universe; and since this nature is superior
to all things and is immune to hindrance by anything, it is necessary that
the cosmos be intelligent and even wise.
   And what is more foolish than to deny that the nature which contains
all things is best, or to say that, although it is best, it is not, in the first
place, alive, secondly, equipped with reason and deliberative ability, and
finally, wise? How else could it be best? For if it resembles plants or
even the lower animals, it must be thought of not as the best but as the
worst. And if it is rational but not wise from the very beginning, the
condition of the cosmos is worse than that of human beings; for a man
can become wise, but if the cosmos has been foolish throughout the
eternity of preceding time, surely it will never achieve wisdom-and so
148                                                                    l/-23

it will be worse than man. And since this is absurd, one must hold that
the cosmos is both wise from the very beginning and a god.
   37. Nor does anything else exist which lacks nothing and is completely
equipped, perfect and fulfilled in all aspects and parts of itself, except
the cosmos. Chrysippus put the point well when he said that just as the
cover was made for the sake of the shield and the sheath for the sword,
in the same way everything else except the cosmos was made for the
sake of other things. For example, the crops and fruits which the earth
bears exist for the sake of animals, but animals for the sake of men; the
horse exists for riding, the ox for plowing and the dog for hunting and
guarding, but man himself was born for the sake of contemplating and
imitating the cosmos; he is not at all perfect, but he is a certain small
portion of what is perfect. 38. But since the cosmos embraces everything
and since there is nothing which is not in it, it is perfect in all respects.
How, then, can it lack what is best? But nothing is better than mind and
reason. Therefore, the cosmos cannot lack these things. Chrysippus also
uses comparisons to show effectively that everything is better in perfected
and full-grown [specimens], for example, better in a horse than in a colt,
in a dog than in a puppy, in a man than in a boy; similarly, what is best
in the cosmos as a whole ought to exist in something which is perfected
and completed; 39. but nothing is more perfect than the cosmos, nothing
better than virtue; therefore, virtue is a property of the cosmos. Indeed,
man's nature is not perfect, and for all that virtue is produced in man; how
much more easily, then, could it be produced in the cosmos; therefore, it
contains virtue. Therefore, it is wise and consequently a god.
   Now that we have seen that the cosmos is divine, we should assign
the same sort of divinity to the stars, which are formed from the most
mobile and pure part of the aither and have no additional elements mixed
into their nature; they are totally hot and bright, so that they too are
also said quite correctly to be animals and to perceive and to have
intelligence. 40. And Cleanthes thinks that the evidence of two senses,
touch and sight, shows that they are totally fiery. For the sun's light is
brighter than that of any fire, seeing that it shines so far and wide across
the boundless cosmos, and the effect of its contact is such that it not
only warms but also often burns things; it could not do either of these
things unless it were fiery. "Therefore," he says, "since the sun is fiery
and is nourished by the moisture from the ocean (since no fire can persist
without fuel), it is necessary either that it be similar to the fire which
we use for our daily purposes or to the fire which is contained in the
bodies of animals. 41. But the fire which we are familiar with and which
we need for the purposes of daily life consumes and destroys everything
and wherever it penetrates it upsets and scatters everything. By contrast,
Physics                                                                 149

the fire found in bodies is life-giving and beneficial, and in everything
it preserves, nourishes, promotes growth, sustains, and provides the
power of sense-perception."
   Consequently, he says that there is no doubt about which sort of fire
the sun is like, since it too causes everything to flourish and mature
according to its kind. Therefore, since the sun's fire is like those fires
which are in the bodies of animals, the sun too should be alive, and
indeed so too should the rest of the heavenly bodies which take their
origin from the celestial heat, which is called aither or heaven [sky].
   42. So, since some animals are born on earth, some in the water, some
in the air, it seems absurd to Aristotle29 to suppose that no animals are
born in that part [of the cosmos] which is most suited for the production
of animal life. But the stars reside in the aither, and since this is the
rarest element and is always alive and moving, it is necessary that an
animal born there should also have the most acute senses and the most
rapid motion. And since the heavenly bodies are born in the aither, it is
reasonable that they should possess the powers of sense-perception and
intelligence. From which it follows that the heavenly bodies should be
counted among the gods.
   Indeed, one may observe that people who live in lands blessed with
pure and thin air have keener intellects and greater powers of understand-
ing than people who live in dense and oppressive climatic conditions.
43. Indeed, they also think that the food one eats makes a difference to
one's mental acuity. So, it is plausible that the stars should have excep-
tional intelligence, since they inhabit the aitherial part of the cosmos and
are nourished by moisture from the land and sea which is rarified by the
great distance it has travelled. The orderliness and regularity of the
heavenly bodies is the clearest indication of their powers of sense-percep-
tion and intelligence. For nothing can move rationally and with measure
except by the use of intelligence, which contains nothing haphazard or
random or accidental. But the orderliness and perpetual consistency of
the heavenly bodies does not indicate a merely natural process (for it is
full of rationality) nor one produced by chance, which tends to produce
haphazard change and is hostile to consistency. It follows, therefore, that
they move on their own, by their own wills, perceptions and divinity.
44. And Aristotle is to be praised for his opinion that everything which
moves does so either by nature or force or will; now the sun and moon
and all the heavenly bodies move; things which move by nature either
move straight down because of weight or straight up because of lightness;
but neither of these applies to the heavenly bodies, since their motion is

29. In the lost work On Philosophy.
150                                                                    l/-23

circular revolution; nor can it be said that the heavenly bodies are com-
pelled by some greater force to move contrary to their nature-for what
force could be greater? The only remaining possibility is that the motion
of the heavenly bodies is voluntary.
   Anyone who [so much as] sees them would be not only ignorant but
even impious to deny that there are gods. Nor does it really make much
difference whether he denies that or merely deprives them of all providen-
tial concern and activity; for in my view [a god] who does nothing might
as well not exist. Therefore, it is so obvious that there are gods that I
can hardly consider anyone who denies it to be in his right mind ....
   57. So I hardly think that I will go wrong to take my lead in discussing
this subject from a leading investigator of truth. Zeno, then, defines nature
thus: he says that it is a craftsmanlike fire which proceeds methodically to
the task of creation. For he thinks that creating and producing are most
characteristic of a craft and that nature (i.e., the craftsmanlike fire, as I
said, which is the instructor of all the other crafts) accomplishes the same
sort of thing as our hands do when they are used in human crafts, but
much more skillfully. And on this theory nature as a whole is craftsman-
like, because it has a kind of method and path to follow; 58. but the
nature of the cosmos itself, which constrains and contains all things in
its embrace, is said by the same Zeno not only to be craftsmanlike but,
to put it directly, a craftsman, since it looks out for and is provident
about all kinds of usefulness and convenience. And just as all other
natural entities are produced, grow and are held together each by its own
seeds, so too the nature of the cosmos has all the voluntary motions,
endeavours and impulses (which the Greeks call hormai) and carries out
the actions consequent on them, just as we ourselves do who are set in
motion by our minds and senses. For since the mind of the cosmos is
like this and can for this reason properly be called prudence or providence
(in Greek the term is pronoia), the principal concern of this providence
and its greatest preoccupation is, first, that the cosmos be as well suited
as possible for remaining in existence, second, that it be in need of
nothing, but most of all that it should possess surpassing beauty and
every adornment.
   59. The cosmos as a whole has been discussed; so have the heavenly
bodies. We now have a pretty clear picture of a large number of gods
who are not idle, but who do not have to carry out the tasks they perform
with laborious and unpleasant effort. For they are not held together by
veins and nerves and bones; nor do they consume the sort of food and
drink which would make their humours either too sharp or too dense;
nor do they have the sorts of bodies which would lead them to dread
Physics                                                                  151

falls or blows or fear diseases produced by physical exhaustion. It was
for fear of this sort of thing that Epicurus invented his insubstantial and
idle gods. 60. Endowed with that most beautiful of shapes, located in
the purest region of the heaven, they move and steer their courses in
such a way that they seem to have come to an agreement to preserve
and protect everything....
    73. The next thing is for me to explain that the world is governed by
the providence of the gods. This is a large topic indeed, and one on
which we are challenged by your school [i.e., the Academics], Cotta; to
be sure the whole debate is with you .... 75. So I say that the cosmos
and all its parts were in the beginning constituted by the providence of
the gods and are governed by it for all time; our school usually divides
the discussion of this topic into three parts. The first is derived from
the argument used to show that the gods exist; when that is granted one
must admit that the cosmos is governed by their rational planning. The
next shows that all things are subordinate to a perceptive nature and are
managed by it most beautifully; when that point is settled it follows that
they were produced by first principles endowed with life. The third topic
is derived from our feelings of admiration for celestial and terrestrial phe-
nomena.
    76. First of all, then, either one must deny that there are gods, as
Democritus does in a way, by bringing in his effluences and Epicurus
his images, or those who admit that there are gods must concede that
they do something impressive. But nothing is more impressive than the
governance of the cosmos; therefore, it is governed by the rational plan-
ning of the gods. But if this is not so, certainly there must be something
which is better and endowed with greater power than a god-whatever
it is, a lifeless nature or necessity set in motion with great force-which
produces all these most beautiful works which we see; 77. it follows then
that the nature of the gods is not preeminently powerful or excellent,
since it is subordinated to that other power, whether it be necessity or
nature, by which the heaven, seas and earth are ruled. But nothing is
superior to god; therefore, it is necessary that the world be ruled by god.
Therefore, god is not obedient to nature and is not subjected to it; and
so god himself rules all of nature.
    Indeed, if we grant that the gods are intelligent, we grant also that
they are provident, especially about the most important things. Are the
gods, then, ignorant about which things are the most important and
about how they are to be handled and preserved? Or do they lack the
power to sustain and carry out such great tasks? But ignorance of things
is foreign to the nature of the gods, and it is inconsistent with the gods'
152                                                                                   l/-23

majesty to have difficulty carrying out their duties because of some
weakness. From these premisses our desired conclusion follows, that the
cosmos is governed by the providence of the gods.
   78. And yet, since there are gods (if they really exist, as they certainly
do) it is necessary that they be alive, and not only alive but also rational
and bound to each other by a kind of political bond [i.e., congeniality]30
and society, governing this single cosmos like some shared republic or
city. 79. It follows that they possess the same kind of reason as is present
in mankind, that the same truth is found in both [gods and men] and
the same law, which consists in injunctions to do what is right and avoid
what is wrong. From this one can see that the gods are the source of man's
prudence and intelligence; and that is why our ancestors consecrated and
publicly dedicated temples to [gods such as] Intelligence, Faith, Virtue
and Concord. How can we deny that [such things] exist among the
gods when we worship their revered and sacred images? But if mankind
possesses intelligence, faith, virtue and concord, from where could they
have come down [to us] here on earth if not from the [gods] above? And
since we have deliberative ability and reason it is necessary that the gods
have them in even greater abundance, and not just have them but also
use them in matters of the greatest value and import. 80. But nothing
is of greater value or import than the cosmos; therefore, it is necessary
that it be administered by the deliberation and providence of the gods.
Finally, since we have shown clearly enough that those whom we see to
possess remarkable power and extraordinary beauty are gods (I mean the
sun and moon and the planets and the fixed stars and the heaven and
the cosmos itself, and the multitude of things which are present through-
out the cosmos and are of great utility and convenience for mankind), it
follows that everything is ruled by the intelligence and providence of the
gods. But enough has been said about the first topic.
   81. Next I must show that everything is subordinate to nature and is
ruled by it in the finest possible manner. But first, I must give a brief
explanation of what nature is, to facilitate the understanding of what I
want to show. For some think that nature is a type of non-rational force
which induces necessary motions in bodies; others that it is a force
endowed with reason and orderliness, proceeding methodically, as it
were, and showing what the cause of each thing brings about and what
follows upon it, [a force] whose cleverness could not be emulated by any
craft, skill or craftsman. [They say] that the power of a seed is such that,
despite its minute size, if it meets with a receptive and favourable nature,
and gets hold of the sort of matter which can nourish it and foster its

30. The Latin is conciliatio, usually Cicero's translation for the Greek oikeiosis.
Physics                                                                  153

growth, the seed can produce each sort of thing, according to its kind-
some things which are nourished only via their roots, others which can
set themselves in motion and perceive and desire and produce others
like themselves. 82. And there are also those who use the term 'nature'
to refer to everything, like Epicurus, who makes the following division:
the nature of all things which exist is bodies and void and their attributes.
But since we say that the cosmos is constituted and governed by nature,
we do not mean that it is like some lump of mud, piece of stone or
anything else with only a natural power of cohesion, but rather that it
is like a tree or animal. For nothing is random in them; rather, it is
evident that they possess a certain orderliness and craftsmanlike quality.
   83. But if nature's craft is responsible for the life and vigour of plants
which are held together by being rooted in the earth, certainly the earth
itself is held together by the same force, since when the earth is impreg-
nated by seeds she gives birth to and brings forth all things, embraces
their roots, nourishes them, fosters their growth and is herself nourished
in turn by external and superior natural elements. And the air and the
aither and all superior entities are nourished by vapours produced from
the earth. So, if the earth is held together by nature and owes its vigour
to nature, then the same rational force is present in the rest of the cosmos.
For the roots [of plants] are bound to the earth, while animals are sustained
by inhalation of air and the air itself helps us to do our seeing, helps us
to do our hearing and speaking; for none of these functions can be carried
out without air. Indeed, it even helps us to move, since wherever we go
or we move to, it seems to give way and yield to us.
   84. And the motion of things to the central, i.e., lowest, region of the
cosmos, and the motion of other things from the middle to the upper
regions, and the circular orbit of others around this mid point all combine
to make the nature of the cosmos a single and continuous whole. And
since there are four kinds of bodies, nature is rendered continuous by
their mutual interchange. For water comes from earth, air from water
and aither from air; then in reverse air comes from aither, then water
and from water comes earth, the lowest element. Thus the union of the
parts of the cosmos is held together because the elements from which
everything is composed move up and down and back and forth. 85. And
this union must either be everlasting, exhibiting the very order which
we now see, or at the very least very stable, enduring for a long, nearly
boundless expanse of time. And either way it follows that the cosmos is
governed by nature.
   Consider the sailing of a fleet of ships, the formation of an army, or
(to return to examples drawn from the works of nature) the reproduction
of vines or trees, or furthermore the shape and organization of the limbs
154                                                                    l/-23

of an animal: which of these points to as great a degree of cleverness as
the cosmos itself does? Either, therefore, there is nothing ruled by a
nature capable of perception or one must admit that the cosmos is so
ruled. 86. Moreover, how can that which contains all natures and the
seeds which produce them fail to be itself governed by nature? So, if
someone were to say that the teeth and body hair exist by nature but
that the man to whom they belong was not constituted by nature, he
would simply be failing to understand that those things which produce
something from themselves have natures more perfect than the things
produced from themselves. But the cosmos is the sower and planter and
(if I may so put it) the parent and nurse and nourisher of all things
governed by nature; the cosmos nourishes and holds together everything
as though those things were its limbs and parts of itself. But if the parts
of the cosmos are governed by nature, it is necessary that the cosmos
itself be governed by nature. And the governance of the cosmos contains
nothing which is subject to criticism; the best possible result which could
be produced from those natures which existed was indeed produced. 87.
Let someone, then, show that something better could have been produced!
But no one will ever show this. And if someone wants to improve on
something [in the cosmos], either he will make it worse or he will be
longing for something which simply could not have happened.
   But if all parts of the cosmos are so constituted that they could neither
have been more useful nor more beautiful, let us see whether they are
the products of chance or of such a character that they could never even
have held together if not for the control exerted by a perceptive and
divine providence. If, therefore, the products of nature are better than
those of the crafts and if the crafts do nothing without the use of reason,
then nature too cannot be held to be devoid of reason. When you look
at a statue or a painting, you know that craftsmanship was applied; and
when you see from afar the course steered by a ship, you do not doubt
that it is moved by rational craftsmanship; when you gaze on a sundial
or waterclock, you understand that the time is told as a result of craft
and not as a result of chance. So what sense does it make to think that
the cosmos, which contains these very crafts and their craftsmen and all
else besides, is devoid of deliberative ability and reason? ...
   94 .... So Aristotle puts it splendidly: 31 95. "If," he says, "there were
people who lived under the earth in fine and splendid houses adorned
with statues and paintings and outfitted with all those things which those
who are considered happy have in great abundance, but who had never
come out onto the surface of the earth, though they had heard by rumour

31. In the lost work On Philosophy.
Physics                                                                        155

and hearsay that some divine force and godly power existed; and then
one day the earth opened its maw and they could emerge from those
hidden places and come out into the regions which we inhabit, and they
then became aware of the huge clouds and the force of the winds and
saw the sun in all its great size and beauty, and also became aware of its
creative power (for it created the day by spreading its light throughout
the entire heaven); and then when night darkened the earth they could
see the whole heaven adorned and ornamented with stars, and the changes
in the illumination of the moon as it waxed and waned, and the risings
and settings of all those heavenly bodies moving in courses immutably
fixed for all of eternity-when they saw all of this, certainly they would
think that both that there are gods and that these things are their handi-
work."
   115 .... And not only are these things amazing, but there is nothing
more so than the fact that the cosmos is so stable and so internally
coherent that nothing can even be conceived of which is more suited to
permanent existence. For all of its parts from every direction exert an
equal effort to reach the centre. Moreover, compound bodies maintain
their existence most effectively when they are surrounded by a kind of
bond which ties them together; and this is done by that nature which
penetrates the entire cosmos and causes everything with its intelligence
and rationality, rapidly drawing the outermost parts [of the cosmos] back
towards the centre. 116. So if the cosmos is spherical, and as a result all
its parts from every direction are held together in an equal balance by
each other and with each other, then it is necessary that the same thing
must apply to the earth too; consequently, since all the parts of the earth
tend towards the centre (and the centre is the lowest point in a sphere),
there is no break in its continuity which might cause such a large and
coordinated system of weight and gravity to crumble. And similarly the
sea, which lies above the earth and yet strives to reach the centre of the
earth, is evenly balanced on all sides and so forms a sphere; it never
overflows or exceeds its bounds. 117. Air is continuous with the sea and
is borne aloft by its lightness; but still it distributes itself in all directions;
and so it is both continuous with the sea and joined to it, and by nature
it moves upwards to the heavens, whose rareness and heat blend with it
and so enable the air to provide to animals life-giving and beneficial
pneuma. The highest part of the heaven, which is termed aitherial, em-
braces the air and also retains its own rarefied heat, being compounded
with nothing else, and [yet] it is conjoined with the boundaries of the
air. And the heavenly bodies revolve in the aither; by their own effort
they hold themselves together in their spherical shape, and in virtue of
their shape and form they sustain their movements-for they are round
156                                                                     l/-23

and, as I think I said before, things which have this shape are least
susceptible to harm. 118. The stars, moreover, are by nature fiery and
so are nourished by vapours which rise from the earth, sea and bodies
of water, having been produced by the sun's warming of the fields and
waters. The stars, and the entire aitherial region, are nourished and
renewed by these vapours; and then they pour them forth again, and in
turn draw them back from the same source, with virtually no loss [to
the vapours] except for a very little bit which is consumed by the fire
of the heavenly bodies and the flames of the aither. And for this reason
our school [the Stoics] thinks that there will someday occur the event
which they say Panaetius had his doubts about, i.e., the final conflagration
of the entire cosmos. This will happen when all the moisture is used up
and the earth cannot be nourished [any longer] and the air cannot return-
for air cannot arise if all the water is consumed; so there will be nothing
left except fire. This, though, is an animal and a god and so in turn it
produces the renewal of the cosmos and the emergence of the same
beautiful order....
   127. ... A great deal of care was taken by divine providence to assure
the eternity of the adornment of the cosmos, by working to assure the
constant existence of the races of beasts, of trees and of all the plants
whose roots are bound in the earth. All of these possess a seminal power
which enables one [living thing] to produce many offspring, and this
seed is is closed up in the inmost core of the fruits produced by each
kind of plant; these same seeds give a good supply of food to men, as
well as filling the earth with new stock of the same type. 128. Why should
I even mention the high degree of reason displayed in the efforts of
beasts to assure the perpetual preservation of their species? First, some
are male and others female-a plan devised by nature to promote their
perpetuity; and their organs are very well suited for the tasks of procre-
ation and conception; and then there is the astounding desire that both
feel for copulation. When the seed [i.e., the semen] has settled in place,
it draws virtually all the [mother's] nutrition to itself and protected within
it it produces a [new] animal. And when the offspring is born, then in
mammalian species virtually all of the mother's food begins to turn to
milk and the offspring which are newly born seek [their mother's] breasts
under the sole guidance of nature, being taught by no one, and are
satisfied by their rich abundance. And to prove that none of this is a
matter of chance but rather that all of these arrangements are the work
of provident and intelligent nature, [note that] those animals who bear
many offspring at once (such as pigs and dogs) have been given a large
number of teats; those animals who bear fewer offspring have fewer teats.
129. What should I say about the love there is in beasts for rearing and
Physics                                                                 157

caring for the young they have produced, until such time as the young
can defend themselves? Although fish are said to abandon their eggs once
they have laid them, it is easy for them to be supported by the water
and to hatch in it. Turtles, though, and crocodiles are said to bear their
young on land, then bury the eggs and go away, leaving them to be born
and raised all by themselves. But hens and other birds seek a peaceful
place for bearing their young and there build dwellings and nests, making
them as soft as possible a support for the eggs in order to promote their
survival. And when the chicks hatch, [the adults] protect them and cuddle
them with their wings so that the cold will not hurt the young; or if it
is hot, they shade them from the sun. But when the chicks can first make
use of their wings, then their mothers accompany them on their flights
but otherwise need care for them no further. 130. Human care and
intelligence is also a factor contributing to the preservation and well-
being of several species of animals and of plants born from the earth;
for there are many kinds of domesticated animals and plants which could
not survive without the care of human beings.
   The agricultural activities of men and their success are made easier
by a variety of different factors in different regions. The Nile irrigates
Egypt, keeping the land flooded all summer until it recedes and leaves
the fields softened and muddy for the planting season. The Euphrates
makes Mesopotamia fertile by bringing new soil to the fields every year.
And the Indus River, the largest of all, not only fertilizes the fields and
softens them but even sows them; for it is said to bring with its waters
a great quantity of seeds which resemble those of grain. 131. I could
mention many other noteworthy things from a variety of areas, and many
regions all of which are fertile for different kinds of crops.
   But how great is nature's generosity! She produces so many different
kinds of appetizing food, at all different times of the year, that we are
always delighted by both its abundance and its novelty. She has given
us the Etesian winds; how fitting to their season and how salutary not
just for mankind but also for the animal species and even for plants
which grow from the earth. Excessive heat is moderated by their [gentle]
breath and they also help our ships to steer a swift and certain course
at sea. I must pass over many points. 132. For the blessings provided
by rivers are beyond counting, as are those of the tides which ebb and
flow, of the mountains clad in forests, of salt pools found far from the
sea shore, regions where the very soil teems with medicinal substances,
and finally, [so are the blessings] of numberless crafts which are essential
for our life and well-being. Even the alternation of day and night helps
to preserve animal life by setting aside different times for action and for
rest. Thus from every angle and by every line of reasoning, our minds
158                                                                      l/-23

prove that everything in this cosmos is wonderfully governed by the
intelligence and deliberative ability of the gods for the purpose of the
well-being and preservation of all.
    133. Here someone will ask, for whose benefit was such a complex
system created? For the sake of trees and plants, which despite their lack
of sense-perception are nevertheless sustained by nature? But surely that
is absurd. For the beasts then? It is no more likely that the gods should
have worked so hard for mute animals which understand nothing. So
for whose sake will we say that the cosmos was made? Surely for the
sake of those of those animals which use reason, and those are gods and
men; surely nothing is better than they are, since reason is superior to
all other things. So it turns out to be plausible that the cosmos and
everything in it were created for the sake of gods and men.
   It will be easier to see that man has been well provided for by the
immortal gods if the entire structure of a human being is considered
along with the entire form and perfection of human nature ....
    140. This catalogue of nature's painstaking and intelligent providence
could be greatly enriched by a consideration of how many rich and
splendid gifts have been bestowed on men by the gods. First of all, she
lifted men up from the earth and gave them a lofty and erect posture,
in order that they might gaze upon the heavens and so acquire knowledge
of the gods. For men come from the earth, not to be its inhabitants and
tenants, but to be, as it were, spectators of higher, indeed celestial, things,
the contemplation of which belongs to no other race of animals ....
    145 . ... All of man's senses are far better than those of the lower
animals. First, in those crafts in which the eyes make the crucial distinc-
tions, painting, sculpture and engraving, and also in distinguishing bodily
motion and gestures, [in all of these] the [human] eye makes many
distinctions more subtly; for the eyes judge the beauty and order and, I
may say, the propriety of colours and figures; and there are other, even
more important distinctions which it makes, since it recognizes the virtues
and the vices, and an angry or friendly person, a happy or sad one, a
brave or cowardly one, a bold or timid one. 146. The ears too possess a
remarkably craftsmanlike sense of judgement, by which we can distin-
guish, in vocal music and in wind or string instruments, timbre, pitch
and key, and a great many vocal qualities as well: a melodious or 'dark'
voice, a smooth or rough one, a flexible or inflexible one. These distinc-
tions are made only by the human ear. Smell, taste and touch also possess
<to some extent> great powers of judgement....
    147. Moreover, he who does not see the divine effort which was put
into the perfection of man's mind, intelligence, reason, deliberative ability
and prudence, seems to me to lack these same qualities. And in discussing
Physics                                                                159

this topic, I wish, Cotta, that I had your eloquence. How [wonderfully]
you could describe, first of all, human understanding; and then our ability
to link conclusions with premisses and grasp the result, i.e., the ability
by which we judge what follows from what and prove it in the form of
a syllogism, and define in a compact description each kind of thing. And
from this we can grasp the power and characteristics of knowledge, a
thing whose excellence even the gods cannot surpass. How extraordinary,
indeed, are those powers which you Academics try to undermine and
even to destroy: the ability to perceive and grasp external objects with
our senses and mind. 148. It is by comparing and contrasting these with
each other that we can produce the crafts, some of which are necessary
for the practicalities of life and some for the sake of pleasure.
   Indeed, the mistress of all, as you call it, is the power of eloquence-
how wonderful and divine it is! First, it enables us to learn what we do
not know and to teach others what we do know; next, we use it to exhort
and persuade, to comfort the unfortunate and to distract the timid from
their fears, to calm those who are passionate and dampen their desires
and anger; it is the bond which unites us in law, legislation and civil
society; it is eloquence which has raised us from a state of uncouth
savagery ....
   153. What then? Does human reason not penetrate even to the heavens?
For we are the only animals who know the risings, settings and courses
of the heavenly bodies; it is the human race which has defined the day,
the month and the year, has learned about solar and lunar eclipses and
predicted their dates of occurrence and degree for all time to come. By
contemplating these things our mind attains to knowledge of the gods,
and that is the origin of piety, which is closely linked with justice and
the other virtues, which are in turn the source of a life which is happy
and similar, even equivalent, to that of the gods-yielding to the heavenly
beings only in respect to immortality, which is quite irrelevant to the
good life. After explaining this, I think that I have shown clearly enough
by how much human nature is superior to the [other] animals. And from
that one ought to see that chance could never have created the form and
arrangement of our limbs or the power of our mind and intelligence.
   154. It remains for me to come to my conclusion at last by showing
that everything in this cosmos which is of use to men was in fact made
and provided for their sake. First of all, the cosmos itself was made for
the sake of gods and men, and the things in it were provided and
discovered for the use of men. For the cosmos is like a common home
for gods and men, or a city which both [gods and men] inhabit. For only
creatures who use reason live by law and justice. So just as one must
hold that Athens and Sparta were founded for the sake of the Athenians
160                                                          l/-23 to l/-24

and Spartans and everything in these cities is properly said to belong to
those peoples, in the same way one must hold that everything in the
entire cosmos belongs to gods and men. 155. Moreover, although the
orbits of the sun and moon and the other stars help the cosmos hold
together, they also serve as a [wonderful] spectacle for men. For no sight
is less likely to become boring, none is more beautiful and none more
outstanding with respect to rationality and cleverness; for by measuring
out their courses we learn when the various seasons change and reach
their peaks. And if men alone know these things, one must judge that
they were created for the sake of men.
   156. The earth is rich with grain and other kinds of vegetables and
pours them forth with the greatest generosity; do you think that it was
made for the sake of beasts or of men? What should I say about vines
and olive trees? Their most rich and fertile fruits are of no use at all to
beasts. Beasts have no knowledge of sowing, cultivating, of reaping and
bringing in the harvest at the proper time, nor of putting it up and
storing it; only men can use and care for these things. 157. Just as we
should say that lyres and flutes are made for the sake of those who can
use them, so one must admit that the things I have been talking about
are provided only for the sake of those who use them; and if some animals
steal or snatch some of it from them, we shall still not say that those
things were made for their sake. For men do not store grain for the sake
of mice or ants, for rather for the sake of their wives, children and
households. So animals use such things by stealth, as I said, but their
masters do so openly and freely. 158. So one must concede that this
generous supply of goods was provided for the sake of men, unless the
great richness and variety of fruits, and their pleasant taste, odour and
appearance, leaves any doubt about whether nature presented them to
men alone.
   So far is it from being true that these things were provided for the
sake of the beasts, that we can see that even the beasts themselves were
created for man's sake. What are sheep for except to provide wool which
can be worked and woven into clothes for men? And without man's
cultivation and care they could not have been nourished or maintained,
nor produced anything of use to others. What can be the meaning of the
faithful guard service of dogs, their loving admiration of their masters,
their hatred of outsiders, and their remarkable skill in tracking and speed
in the hunt? Only that they were created to serve man's needs .....
   159 . ... It would take too long to recount the useful services provided
by mules and asses, which were certainly provided for man's use. 160.
What is there in pigs, except food? Chrysippus says that the pig was
given a soul in place of salt, to keep the meat from spoiling. Because it
Physics                                                                           161

is well-suited for feeding humans, no other type of animal is more prolific
of offspring .... 161. ... You can scan the land and all the seas with
your mind, as though with your eyes, and you will immediately see
huge expanses of land which bear fruit [for man], and densely forested
mountains, pasture land for cattle, and also sea-lanes for ships to sail in
with remarkable speed. 162. It is not just on the earth's surface either;
but even in the deepest, darkest bowels of the earth there lies hidden a
great store of useful materials which were made for man and are only
discovered by man.
   There is another point too, which both of you 32 will perhaps seize on
for criticism, you Cotta because Carneades loved to attack the Stoics,
Velleius because Epicurus ridiculed nothing so much as the prediction
of future events; but I think that it proves better than anything else
that divine providence takes thought for human affairs. For divination
certainly does exist, since it shows up in many different places and at
many different times, in both private and public affairs. 163.... This
power, or art, or natural ability of knowing future events was certainly
given to man and to no other animal by the immortal gods .... 164. And
the immortal gods do not limit themselves to taking thought for mankind
as a whole, but they even concern themselves with individual men. For
one may gradually reduce the scope of universality, from mankind to
smaller and smaller numbers of men, and finally get down to single
individuals [applying the same arguments at each stage]. ...

Aetius 1.6.1-16 (= Dox.Gr. pp. 292-297;                                       [11-24]
SVF 2.1009)
The Source of Man's Conception of the Gods
   1. The Stoics define the substance of god thus: it is an intelligent and
fiery pneuma, which does not have a shape but changes into whatever it
wishes and assimilates itself to all things. 2. They [sc. men] acquired the
conception of god first by getting it from the beauty of the things which
appear to them. For nothing beautiful becomes so at random and haphaz-
ardly but rather by a craft which acts as an artisan. And the cosmos is
beautiful; this is clear from its shape and its colour and its size and the
varied adornment of the heavenly bodies around the cosmos. 3. For the
cosmos is spherical and this is the best shape of all. For this shape alone
is similar to its own parts. And since it is rounded, it contains parts
which are round. For it is for this reason that Plato held that the most
sacred [part of man], his mind, is in the head. 4. And its colour is beautiful

32. The two other speakers in the dialogue are an Epicurean and an Academic sceptic.
162                                                             l/-24 to l/-25

too. For it has a bluish colour, which is darker than purple but has a
shining quality. And for this reason it can be observed from such great
distances, because it cuts through so great an expanse of air in virtue of
the intensity of its colour. 5. And it is also beautiful because of its size.
For among things which are of the same type, the one which includes
[or: surrounds] [the others] is beautiful, as in the case of animal or a tree.
   6. And these phenomena too complete the beauty of the cosmos;
for the ecliptic in the heavens is adorned with a variety of different
constellations: 33

           Cancer is there, and so is Leo, and after him Virgo and
           Libra, and Scorpio himself and Sagittarius and Capricorn too,
           and after Capricorn comes Aquarius; and Pisces with its
           shining stars is next, after which come Aries and Taurus and
           Gemini.

  7. And [god] has produced thousands of other [constellations] by
similar revolutions of the cosmos. Hence Euripides too says, 34

           The starry gleam of heaven
           the fair adornment of Time, the wise craftsman.

   8. From this we have acquired the conception of god. For the sun and
the moon and the rest of the heavenly bodies moving around the earth
always rise [displaying] the same colours, the same sizes, and in the
same places at the same times. 9. Therefore, the initiators of religious
observance expounded it for us in three forms. First, that based on
physics, second, that based on myths, and third, that based on the
testimony of customs. The philosophers teach the one which is based
on physics and the poets the one based on myths, while the customary
forms of religious observance are always established by individual cities.
   10. Their entire teaching is divided into seven 'species'. The first is that
based on the phenomena of the heavens; for we acquired our conception of
god from the phenomena of the heavenly bodies, by seeing that they are
the cause of great harmony, and [by seeing] the regularity of day and
night, winter and summer, risings and settings, and of the birth of animals
and plants in the earth. 11. Therefore, they thought that the heaven was
a father, while earth was a mother. Of these, the one is father because
the effusions of water play the role of seeds, while the other is mother

33. Aratus Phainomena 545-549.
34. Actually the poet Critias, fr. 1.33-34 p. 771 Nauck.
Physics                                                                163

because she receives these [seeds] and bears [offspring]. And seeing that
the heavenly bodies are always moving and are the cause of our ability
to observe [things], they called the sun and moon gods.
   12. For the second and third types they divided the gods into the
harmful and the beneficial; the beneficial ones are Zeus, Hera, Hermes
and Demeter, while the harmful ones are the Penalties, the Furies, Ares;
these they abhor since they are difficult to deal with and violent.
   13. They assigned a fourth and a fifth [type of gods] to activities and
passions, Eros, Aphrodite and Longing being passions and Hope, Justice
and Good Order being activities.
   14. As a sixth type they added the fictions of the poets. For when
Hesiod wanted to make gods fathers of gods who were born, he introduced
sires for them like these: 35

          Coeus, Krios, Hyperion and Iapetos

   15. And it is for this reason that it is called mythical.
   As a seventh, in addition to all these, there are [gods who were] born
human but were honoured because of their good deeds which benefitted
the life of all men; for example, Heracles, the Dioscuri and Dionysus.
   16. They said that they were anthropomorphic on the grounds that
the divine is the most authoritative of all things and that man is the most
beautiful of animals, being adorned in a distinctive way by virtue, in
accordance with the constitution of his mind. So they thought that what
is best [in the cosmos] would be similar to those who are superior
[among animals].

Origen On Principles 3.1.2-3 (=SVF 2.988)                           [11-25]
   2. Of things that move, some have the cause of motion in themselves,
while others are moved only from the outside. Thus things which are
moved by being carried, such as sticks and stones and every form of
matter held together by hexis [condition] alone, are moved from the
outside ... Plants and animals, and in a word everything held together
by nature and soul have within themselves the cause of motion. They
say that this category includes veins of metal and, in addition, that fire
and perhaps springs of water are also self-moved. Of things which contain
the cause of motion in themselves, they say that some move from them-
selves and others by themselves. 'From themselves' applies to soulless
objects, 'by themselves' to things with soul. For ensouled things move

35. Theogony 134.
164                                                            l/-25 to l/-32

by themselves when a presentation occurs which stimulates the impulse .
. . . 3. But the rational animal has reason too in addition to the power
of presentation. Reason judges the presentations and rejects some and
admits others.


Origen On Prayer 6.1 (= SVF 2.989)                                   [11-26]

   Of things that move, some have the mover external to them as do
soulless things and those held together by hexis [condition] alone. And
those things that move by nature or by soul sometimes also move not as
beings of this sort, but in a manner similar to those held together by
hexis alone. For stones and sticks, [i.e.,] things which are cut off from a
vein of metal or have lost the power to grow, are held together only by
hexis and have their motive power external to them. And the bodies of
animals and the moveable parts of plants which are shifted by someone
are not shifted qua animal or plant, but in a manner similar to sticks and
stones which have lost the power to grow .... After those, second are
those objects moved by the nature or the soul within them, which are
also said to move 'from themselves' by those who use words in their
stricter senses [i.e., the Stoics]. Third is the motion in animals which is
termed motion 'by itself. I think that the motion of rational animals is
motion 'through themselves'. And if we deprive an animal of motion 'by
itself it is impossible to go on thinking of it as an animal. Rather, it will
be similar either to a plant moved only by nature or a stone carried along
by an external agent. And if the animal is aware of its own motion, this
animal must be rational, since we have called this motion 'through itself.


Simplicius Commentary on Aristotle's                                 [11-27]
Categories 1b1 p. 306.19-27 (=SVF 2.499)
   They [the Stoics] say that the differences between kinds [of motion]
are: [I] moving 'from themselves', as a knife has the ability to cut because
of its special structure (for the doing is carried out in accordance with
its shape and form); [2] and the activation of motion 'through oneself,
as natural organisms and curative powers carry out their action: for the
seed is sown and unfolds its proper [rational] principle and attracts the
matter nearby and fashions the principles in it; [3] and also doing 'by
oneself, which in general terms is doing by a thing's own impulse. But
another sense [4] is doing by a rational impulse, which is called action.
And [5] even more specific than this is activity according to virtue.
Physics                                                                 165

Sextus M 8.263 (SVF 2.363)                                           [11-28]

  According to them, the incorporeal can neither do anything nor have
anything done to it.

Cicero Academica 1.39 (SVF 1.90)                                     [11-29]

   [Zeno] disagreed with the same men [Peripatetics and Academics] in
that he thought it totally impossible for anything to be effected by what
lacked body; ... and indeed he held that whatever effected something
or was affected by something must be body.

Aetius 1.10.5 (= Dox. Gr. p. 309; SVF 2.360)                         [11-30]

  Zeno's followers, the Stoics, said that the Ideas [i.e., Platonic Forms]
were our own thoughts.

Syrianus Comm. On Aristotle's Metaphysics                            [11-31]
1078b12, CIAG 6.1, p. 105.22-23 (SVF 2.364)
  ... that the Forms were not introduced, as Chrysippus and Arche-
demus and the majority of the Stoics thought, by these godlike men
[Socrates, Plato, the Parmenideans, the Pythagoreans] to account for our
customary use of the names of things [i.e., common nouns] ...

Seneca Letters on Ethics 58.11-15 (SVF 2.332)                        [11-32]

   11. Moreover, there is something higher than body; for we say that
some things are corporeal, some incorporeal. What, therefore, is that
from which these are derived? That to which we just now assigned the
technical term 'that which is'. It will be divided into species so that we
say 'that which is' is either corporeal or incorporeal. 12 .... That genus,
'that which is', has no genus above it; it is the first principle of things;
everything is subordinate to it. 13. But the Stoics want to set yet another
genus above this one, which is a higher principle; I will speak of it now
... 15. Some Stoics held that the first genus is the "something"; I shall
add an explanation of why they held this. They say that in the nature
of things, some things are and some are not; and nature also includes
those things which are not but which occur to our mind, such as Centaurs,
Giants and whatever, being formed by a false concept, begins to take on
a certain image [in our minds], although it does not have substance.
166                                                            l/-33 to l/-38

Alexander of Aphrodisias Comm. on                                    [11-33]
Arisotle's Topics 121a10, 127a26 (CIAG 2.2,
p. 301.19-25, 359.12-16 = SVF 2.329)
   301.19 In this way you might show that the Stoics do not properly
posit the something as a genus of 'that which is'; for obviously, if it is
a something, it is something which is. And if it is something which is, then
the definition of being would apply to it. But they made an idiosyncratic
stipulation to the effect that 'that which is' applies only to bodies and
so tried to evade the paradox. For thus they say that the 'something' is
its highest genus and is predicated not just of bodies but also of incorpore-
als .... 359.12 In this way it will be shown that the something is not
the genus of everything. For it will also be the genus of the one, which
is either co-extensive with it or of even wider extent, if indeed the one
also applies to the concept; but the something applies only to bodies and
incorporeals, while the concept, according to the proponents of this
theory, is neither of these.

Sextus M 10.218 (SVF 2.331)                                          [11-34]
   The Stoics, though, thought that time is incorporeal. For they say
that of "somethings" some are bodies and some are incorporeals and they
listed four kinds of incorporeals: lekton [thing said] and void and place
and time. From which it is clear that in addition to supposing that time
is incorporeal they also believe that it is a thing conceived of as existing
on its own.

Plutarch Common Conceptions 1081c-1082a                              [11-35]
(SVF 2.518, 2.519)
   (1081c) It is paradoxical for the future and past time to exist and for
present time not to exist, but for the recent and more remote past to
subsist and for the "now" not to exist at all. But this result does obtain
for the Stoics, who do not allow a minimal time to exist and do not want
to have a partless "now"; but they say that whatever one thinks one has
grasped and conceived as present is in part future and in part past.
Consequently there neither remains nor is left in the "now" any part of
present time (1081d), if the time which is called present is divided up,
some of it being future and some past ....
   (1081ยฃ) ... Chrysippus wishing to be subtle about the division [of
time] says in his On Void and in some other writings, that the past part
of time and the future part do not exist but subsist and only the present
exists. But in the third, fourth and fifth books of On Parts he posits that
Physics                                                                  167

part of the present time is future and part is past. (1082a) Consequently
it turns out that he divides the existing part of time into the non-existing
parts and the existing part; or rather, he leaves absolutely no part of time
in existence if the present has no part which is not future or past.

Arius Didymus fr. 26 (= Dox. Gr. pp. 461-2;                           [11-36]
SVF 2.509)
   Chrysippus says that time is the interval of motion according to which
the measure of speed and slowness is spoken of; or, time is the interval
which accompanies the motion of the cosmos. And each and every thing
is said to move and to exist in accordance with time, unless of course
time is spoken of in two senses, as are earth and sea and void and the
universe and its parts. And just as void as a whole is infinite in every
direction, so too time as a whole is infinite in both directions; for both
the past and the future are infinite. He says most clearly that no time is
wholly present; for since the divisibility of continuous things is infinite,
time as a whole is also subject to infinite divisibility, by this method of
division. Consequently no time is present in the strictest sense, but only
loosely speaking. He says that only the present exists, whereas the past
and future subsist but do not at all exist-unless it is in the way that
predicates are said to exist, though only those which actually apply; for
example, walking 'exists for me' when I am walking, but when I am
reclining or sitting it does not 'exist for me' ....

Aetius 1.18.5, 1.20.1 (= Dox. Gr. p. 316, 317;                        [11-37]
SVF 1.95)
   1.18.5 Zeno and his followers say that there is no void within the
cosmos but an indefinite void outside it. . . . 1.20.1 The Stoics and
Epicurus say that void, place and space are different. Void is the privation
of body, place is what is occupied by body and space is what is partly
occupied, as in the case of wine in a jar.

Arius Didymus fr. 25 (Dox.Gr. p. 460-461                              [11-38]
SVF 2.503)
   Chrysippus proclaimed that place was that which is occupied through-
out by what exists or what is such as to be occupied by what exists and
is occupied throughout by some thing or things. And if what is such as
to be occupied is partly occupied by what exists and partly not, the whole
will be neither void nor place, but another unnamed thing. For the void
is spoken of similarly to empty containers, and place similarly to full ones.
168                                                            l/-38 to l/-43

    Is space what is such as to be occupied by what is, only bigger, and,
as it were, a larger container for a body, or is it what has space for a
larger body? Anyway, the void is said to be unlimited. For what is outside
the cosmos is like this and place is limited because no body is unlimited.
Just as the bodily is limited, so the incorporeal is unlimited, for time is
unlimited and so is void. For just as the nothing is no limit, so [there is
no limit] of the nothing, which is what the void is like. For it is unlimited
in its own substance. And again, this is limited by being filled. If what
fills it is removed, it is not possible to conceive of a limit for it.

Sextus M 7.38-45 (SVF 2.132)                                         [11-39]
    38. Some, and especially the Stoics, think that truth differs from the
true [or what is true] in three ways: in substance, composition and power.
In substance, in that truth is corporeal and the true is incorporeal. And
reasonably so, they say; for the true is a proposition and a proposition
is a thing said [lekton ]; a thing said is incorporeal. And again truth is a
body in that it seems to be knowledge which declares all which is true;
39. and all knowledge is the leading part of the soul in a certain state
(as the hand in a certain state is thought of as a fist). And the leading
part of the soul, according to them, is a body. Therefore, truth too is
corporeal in kind. 40. In composition, in that the true is conceived of as
something single and simple in nature, such as "it is day" and "I am
speaking"; and truth is conceived thought of in the opposite way as
systematic and a collection of several things, in that it is knowledge ....
42. In power, these things differ from one another since the true is not
always connected to truth (for a fool and an idiot and a madman sometimes
say something true but do not have knowledge of the true) and truth is
contemplated in knowledge. Hence, he who has this is a wise man (for
he has knowledge of true things) and never lies even if he says something
false since he utters it not from a bad disposition but from a good one .
. . . 44 . ... In this way the wise man, i.e., the man who has knowledge
of the true, will sometimes say what is false but will never lie since his
mind will not assent to a falsehood. . .. 45. . . . Saying a falsehood is
very different from lying in that the former comes from good intention,
whereas lying comes from bad intention.

Sextus M 8.11-12 (SVF 2.166)                                         [11-40]
   11 . ... And there was yet another quarrel among the dogmatists; for
some located the true and false in the thing signified, some located it in
the utterance and some in the motion of the intellect. And the Stoics
championed the first view, saying that three things are linked with one
Physics                                                                  169

another: the thing signified, the signifier, and the object. 12. Of these,
the signifier is the utterance, for example, "Dion"; the thing signified is
the thing indicated by the utterance and which we grasp when it subsists
in our intellect and which foreigners do not understand although they
hear the utterance; the object is the external existent, for example, Dion
himself. Two of these are bodies, the utterance and the object, and one
incorporeal, the signified thing, i.e., the thing said [lekton] which is true
or false. This last point is not of unrestricted application, but some lekta
are incomplete and some complete. One kind of complete lekton is the
so-called proposition, which they describe thus: a proposition is that
which is true or false.


Sextus M 8.70 (SVF 2.187)                                             [11-41]

   They say that what subsists in accordance with a rational presentation
is a thing said [lekton] and that a rational presentation is one according
to which the content of a presentation can be made available to reason.


Ammonius Comm. on Aristotle's De                                      [11-42]
Interpretatione 16a3 CIAG 4.5 pp. 17.24-28
(SVF 2.168)
   Here [De Interpretatione] Aristotle teaches what is primarily and imme-
diately signified by utterances, saying that it is thoughts, and that through
these as intermediaries, objects are signified. And we need think of nothing
beyond these which is between the thought and the object. But the Stoics
hypothesized that such a thing exists and thought it should be called a
"thing said".


Stobaeus Anthology 1.13.1c, vol. 1                                    [11-43]
p. 138.14-22 W-H (SVF 1.89)
   Zeno says that a cause is "that because of which". That of which it
is the cause is an event [or accident]. And the cause is a body and that
of which it is the cause is a predicate. It is impossible for the cause to
be present and that of which it is the cause not to be the case. What is
said amounts to this: a cause is that because of which something comes
about, for example, prudent thinking occurs because of prudence, living
because of soul, and temperate behaviour because of temperance. For if
someone has temperance or soul or prudence it is impossible for there
not to be temperate behaviour, life, or prudent thinking.
170                                                           l/-44 to l/-54

Sextus M 9.211 (SVF 2.341)                                           [11-44]
    ... The Stoics say that every cause is a body which causes something
incorporeal in a body. For example, a scalpel, which is a body, causes
in flesh, which is a body, the incorporeal predicate "being cut". Again,
fire, which is a body, causes in wood, which is a body, the incorporeal
predicate "being burned".

Simplicius Comm. on Aristotle's Categories                           [11-45]
1b25 (= CIAG 8.66.32-67.2; SVF 2.369)
  The Stoics think it right to reduce the number of primary categories.
And among this reduced number they include some which have been
changed. For they divide them into four: substrates [underlying things],
and qualities [qualified things], dispositions [things in a certain state]
and relative dispositions [things in a certain state with respect to
something]. . .

Galen On Incorporeal Qualities 1, 19.463-464                         [11-46]
K. (SVF 2.377)
  There was a discussion of qualities and of all accidents, which the
Stoics say are bodies.

Aetius 1.15.6 (=Dox. Gr. p. 313, SVF 1.91)                           [11-47]
  Zeno the Stoic says that colours are primary arrangements of matter.

Galen Comm. On Hippocrates On Humours 1,                             [11-48]
16.32 K. (SVF 1.92)
  Zeno of Citium believed that, like qualities, substances were totally
mixed.

Aetius 4.20.2 (=Dox. Gr. p. 410, SVF 2.387)                          [11-49]
   The Stoics say that voice is a body. For everything which acts or has
effects is a body. And voice acts and has effects. For we hear it and
perceive it striking our ears and making an impression like a seal-ring
on wax. Again, everything which stimulates or disturbs is a body; and
good music stimulates us and bad music disturbs us. Again, everything
which is in motion is a body; and voice is in motion and strikes smooth
surfaces and is reflected as in the case of a ball thrown against a wall. At
any rate, inside the Egyptian pyramids, one utterance produces four or
even five echoes.
Physics                                                                 171
Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions                                   [11-50]
1053f-1054b (SVF 2.449)
   (1053ยฃ) ... again in On Conditions [Chrysippus] says that conditions
[hexeis] are nothing but [parcels] of air. For bodies are held together by
these, and it is air which holds together and is responsible for the quality
of each of the things held together by a condition. They call this air
"hardness" in iron, "denseness" in stone, "whiteness" in silver. (1054a)
... And yet they claim all the time that matter, which is in itself inactive
and unmoving, underlies the qualities and that the qualities, which are
pneumata and airy tensions, produce forms and shapes (1054b) in whatever
parts of matter they are in.

Pseudo-Galen Introduction 9, 13 14.697 and                           [11-51]
726 K. (SVF 2.716)
   9. According to the ancients, there are two [forms of] pneuma: that of
the soul and that of nature. And the Stoics add a third, that of hexis,
which they call a condition ....
   13. There are two forms of the inborn pneuma, that of nature and that
of soul; and some add a third, that of hexis. The pneuma which holds
things is what makes stones cohere [hold together], while that of nature
is what nourishes animals and plants, and that of the soul is that which,
in animate objects, makes animals capable of sense-perception and of
every kind of movement.

Aetius 1.3.25 (= Dox. Gr. p. 289; SVF 1.85)                          [11-52]
  Zeno of Citium, son of Mnaseas, says the principles are god and matter,
the former being responsible for acting, the latter for being acted upon.
And there are four elements.

Achilles Introduction to Aratus p. 31, 1-3                           [11-53]
(SVF 1.85)
  -Zeno of Citium says that the principle of the universe is god and
matter, god being the active and matter what is acted upon. From these
the four elements came into being.

Chalcidius Comm. on Plato's Timaeus c. 290                           [11-54]
(SVF 1.86)
  But several philosophers distinguish matter and substance, such as
Zeno and Chrysippus. They say that matter is that which underlies all
172                                                            l/-54 to l/-59

those things which have qualities; however, the primary matter of all
things or their most primeval foundation is substance-being in itself
without qualities and unformed. For example, bronze, gold, iron, etc.
are matter of those things which are manufactured from them, but are
not substance. But that which is cause of the existence of both the former
and the latter is itself substance.

Arius Didymus fr. 20 (= Dox. Gr. pp.                                  [11-55]
457-458; SVF 1.87)
   Zeno: The primary matter of all things which exist is substance and
all of this is everlasting and becomes neither greater nor smaller. Its parts
do not always stay the same, but are divided and fused together. Through
this runs the rational principle of the universe, which some call fate,
being just like the seed in seminal fluid.

Chalcidius Comm. on Plato's Timaeus c. 294                            [11-56]
(SVF 1.87)
   [The Stoics say] that god is that which matter is or that god is the
inseparable quality of matter and that he moves through matter just as
semen moves through the genital organs.

Chalcidius Comm. on Plato's Timaeus c. 292                            [11-57]
(SVF 1.88)
   Then Zeno said that this substance itself is finite and that only this
substance is common to all things which exist, but that it is divisible and
changeable in every place. Its parts change but do not perish in such a
way that they turn into nothing from being existents. But he thinks that
there is no form or shape or quality which is proper to the foundation
of the matter of all things (just as there is no proper shape for the
innumerable shapes which wax too takes on), but that nevertheless this
matter is always joined with and inseparably bonded to some quality.
And since it is as birthless as it is deathless because it neither comes into
being from the non-existent nor turns into nothing, it does not lack an
eternal spirit [pneuma] and liveliness which will move it in a rational
manner, sometimes all of it, sometimes a proportional part of it, and
which is the cause of such frequent and powerful changes in the universe.
Moreover, this spirit which moves will not be nature but soul-and
indeed rational soul, which gives life to this sentient cosmos and gave it
the beauty which is now visible. And they call this [i.e., the cosmos] a
happy animal and a god.
Physics                                                                   173

Alexander of Aphrodisias On Mixture                                   [11-58]
224.32-225.9 (SVF 2.310)
   At this point in the argument one might charge that, while saying that
there are two principles for all things, matter and god, the latter being
active and the former passive, they [the Stoics] also say that god is mixed
with matter, extending through all of it and shaping it, forming it and
making it into a cosmos in this manner. If, according to them, god is a
body, being intelligent and everlasting pneuma, and matter too is a body,
then in the first place a body once more will extend through a body; and
second, this pneuma will either be one of the four simple bodies which they
also call elements, or a compound mixture of them, as they themselves also
seem to say, I suppose (for they postulate that pneuma's substance is
composed of air and fire); or, if it is something else, then the divine body
will be some fifth substance.

Alexander of Aphrodisias On Mixture                                   [11-59]
p. 223.25-224.14 (SVF 2.441)
   ... This being so, how could it be true that the totality is unified and
held together because some pneuma extends through all of it? Next, it
would be reasonable that the coherence produced by the pneuma should
be found in all bodies; but this is not so. For some bodies are coherent
and some discrete. Therefore, it is more reasonable to say that each of
them is held together and unified with itself by the individual form in
virtue of which each of them has its being, and that their sympathy with
each other is preserved by means of their communion with the matter
and the nature of the divine body which surrounds it, rather than by the
bond of the pneuma. For what is this 'pneumatic tension' by which things
are bound and so both possess coherence with their own parts and are
linked to adjacent objects? For [according to the Stoics] it is when pneuma
is forced by something that it takes on a kind of strength as a result of
the concentrated movement, because it is naturally suited to this (since
owing to its flexibility it can offer no resistance to what moves it). And
being flexible in its own nature it is fluid and easily divisible, and so too
is the nature of all other things with which pneuma is mixed; it is in
virtue of pneuma above all that they are divided so very easily. For this
reason, at any rate, some thought it was something void and an intangible
nature, while others thought it had a lot of void in it.
   Moreover, if the pneuma which holds bodies together is the cause of
their persistence and not disintegrating, it is clear that bodies which do
disintegrate would not possess pneuma binding them together.
   And how, in the first place, could the divisibility of bodies be preserved,
174                                                            l/-59 to l/-64

if division is the separation of what is united, and according to them all
things stay united with each other, all the same even when they are
divided? And how could one avoid the inconsistency of saying that objects
which are adjacent to each other and can easily be separated from each
other are all the same united with each other, being coherent and never
being able to be separated from each other without division?

Plotinus 2.4.1 (SVF 2.320)                                            [11-60]
   And those who postulate that the only things that exist are bodies and
that substance consists in them say that matter is one and that it underlies
the elements and that matter itself is substance. All other things are, as
it were, modifications of matter and even the elements are matter in a
certain state. Moreover, they dare to bring matter into the realm of the
gods. And finally, they say that their god himself is this matter in a
certain state and they give it [matter] a body, saying that body itself is
qualityless, and magnitude too.

Aristocles, in Eusebius Prep. Ev. 15.14,                              [11-61]
816d-817a (SVF 1.98)
   They say that fire is an element of the things that exist, as does
Heraclitus, and that the principles of this are matter and god (as Plato
said). But he [Zeno] said that both (the active and the passive) were
bodies, while Plato's first active cause was said to be incorporeal. And
then, at certain fated times, the entire cosmos goes up in flames and then
is organized again. And the primary fire is like a kind of seed, containing
the rational principles and cause of all things and events, past, present,
and future. And the interconnection and sequence of these things is fate
and knowledge and truth and an inescapable and inevitable law of what
exists. Thus, all things in the cosmos are organized extremely well, as
in a very well-managed government.

Stobaeus Anthology 1.10.16c, vol. 1                                   [11-62]
p. 129.1-130.20 W-H (SVF 2.413)
   Chrysippus. Concerning the elements which come from substance, he
holds views of this sort, following Zeno the leader of the school. He says
there are four elements, <fire, air, water, and earth, from which all animals
are formed> and plants and the whole cosmos and the things contained
in it, and into which these same things are resolved. And <fire> is said
to be an element par excellence because the others are first formed from
Physics                                                                 175

it by qualitative change and finally are dissolved and resolved into it,
while fire itself is not subject to dissolution or breakdown into anything
else. So on this theory fire is said independently to be an element, since
it is not formed together with another one, while according to the earlier
theory fire is formed with other elements. For first there occurs the
change in form from fire to air, second occurs the analogous change from
water to earth. Again, from earth as it is resolved and dissolved the first
dissolution is into water, second from water to air, third and last to fire.
Everything fiery is called fire, and everything airy air and so forth.
"Element" is used in three senses by Chrysippus: in one sense fire is the
element since the others are formed from it by change of quality and the
breakdown is back into fire; in another sense there are said to be four
elements (fire, air, water, and earth)-since from one or more of these
or all of them everything else is formed: through the four, for example,
animals and all terrestrial compounds; through two, for example, the
moon is formed of fire and air; or through one, as the sun which is
formed of only fire-the sun being pure fire. And a third sense [here
there is a lacuna] to be what was first formed in this way, so that it
methodically produced generation from itself until the end [was reached]
and [then returning] from that point it received the breakdown into itself
by the same method. And he said that there have also been the following
descriptions of the element, that it is most mobile on its own, and the
principle <and the spermatic> principle and the eternal power which has
a nature such as to move itself both downwards towards conversion and
upwards away from the conversion again in a complete circle, both
absorbing all things into itself and again restoring them from itself in a
regular and methodical way.

Seneca Letters on Ethics 92.30 (SVF 2.637)                          [11-63]

   Why shouldn't you think that there is something divine in him who
is a part of god? All of that which contains us is one and is god. And
we are his allies and parts.

Nemesius On the Nature of Man 2                                     [11-64]
(SVF 2.773)
    Practically all the ancients disagree on the theory of the soul. For
Democritus and Epicurus and the entire Stoic school claim that the soul
is a body. And these same people who claim that the soul is a body disagree
about its substance. For the Stoics say it is a warm and fiery pneuma.
176                                                            l/-65 to l/-72

Arius Didymus fr. 39 (= Dox. Gr. 471.18-24,                          [11-65]
SVF 2.809)
   ... They say the soul is generated and destroyed; it is not destroyed
as soon as it leaves the body but lasts for a while on its own. The soul
of the virtuous man lasts until the breakdown of everything into fire, but
that of fools [only] for a certain length of time. They say that the enduring
of souls works like this, i.e., that we last by becoming souls separated
from the body, changing into a more limited substance, that of the soul.
But the souls of imprudent and irrational animals are destroyed together
with their bodies ....

Nemesius On the Nature of Man 2                                      [11-66]
(SVF 2.790)
  And Chrysippus says, "Death is a separation of soul from body. But
nothing incorporeal can be separated from a body. For neither does
anything incorporeal touch a body, and the soul both touches and is
separated from the body. Therefore the soul is a body."

Tertullian On the Soul 5.3 (SVF 1.137)                               [11-67]
   Then Zeno, defining the soul as the inborn pneuma [spiritus], teaches
as follows: that, he says, because of the departure of which the animal
dies, is a body. But when the inborn pneuma departs the animal dies.
But the inborn pneuma is the soul. Therefore, the soul is a body.

Chalcidius Comm. on Plato's Timaeus c. 220                           [11-68]
(SVF 1.138)
  The Stoics grant that the heart is the seat of the leading part of the
soul, but nevertheless that it is not the blood which is created together
with the body. To be sure, Zeno argues that the soul is [inborn] pneuma
thus: that whose withdrawal from the body causes the animal to die is
certainly the soul; furthermore, the animal dies when the inborn pneuma
withdraws; therefore, the inborn pneuma is the soul.

Alexander De Anima Mantissa CIAG Supp.                               [11-69]
2.1 p. 117-118 (SVF 2.792)
   [Alexander cites and rejects Stoic arguments.]-117.1-2. For it [the
soul] is not a body just because the same thing is predicated of it [as of
the body].-117.9-11. But the argument which says that something
incorporeal does not share an experience with a body, and purports to
show that the soul is not incorporeal, is also false.-117.21-23. Nor is
the argument sound which says that nothing incorporeal is separated
Physics                                                                   177

from a body, but the soul is separated from the body, so that it is not
incorporeal.-117.28-29. Nor is it true to say that only those things
which touch each other can be separated from each other.-117 .30-118.2.
Nor is this true: 'we are animate because of that by which we breathe;
but we are animate because of the soul.' Not even if [it is true] that
animals cannot exist without inborn pneuma does it follow that this is
the soul.

Alexander De Anima CIAG Supp. 2.1                                     [11-70]
p. 18.27-19.1 (SVF 2.793)
   Nor does the argument which says, "that of which a part is a body is
itself also a body; but perception is a part of soul and is a body; so [the
soul] itself is a body,' prove anything.

Galen On the Habits ofthe Soul4, 4.783-784                            [11-71]
K. (SVF 2.787)
    For they [the Stoics] claim that the soul is a kind of pneuma, as is
nature too; the pneuma of nature is more fluid and cool, while that of
the soul is drier and hotter. Consequently, [they also think this]: that
pneuma is a kind of matter proper to the soul, and in form the matter is
either a symmetrical blend of airy and fiery substance; for it is not possible
to say that it is either air alone or fire alone, since the body of an animal
does not appear to be either extremely cold or extremely hot, but rather
it is not even dominated by a great excess of either of these; for if there
is even a minor deviation from symmetry [in the blend] the animal
becomes feverish because of the unmeasured excess of fire, and it becomes
chilled and livid, or completely incapable of sense-perception as a result
of blending [excessively] with the air. For [air] itself in its own right is
cold, and becomes temperate as a result of mixture with the fiery element.
So it is immediately clear that the substance of the soul is a certain kind
of blend of air and fire, according to the Stoics, and that Chrysippus was
rendered intelligent because of a temperate mixture of these [elements].

Nemesius On the Nature of Man 2.                                      [11-72]
(SVF 1.518)
   76. Cleanthes weaves a syllogism of this sort: not only, he says, are
we like our parents in respect to the body, but also in respect to the
soul, in our passions, characters and dispositions; but similarity and
dissimilarity are [properties] of body, and not of the incorporeal; therefore,
the soul is a body .... 78. Again, [Cleanthes] says: nothing incorporeal
shares an experience with a body, nor does a body with an incorporeal,
178                                                           l/-72 to l/-78

but [only] a body with a body; but the soul suffers with the body when
[for example,] it is ill and when it is cut. And the body [suffers] with
the soul-at any rate when [the soul] is ashamed it [the body] turns red,
and pale when [the soul] is frightened; therefore, the soul is a body.

Aetius 4.21.1-4 (= Dox. Gr. pp. 410-411;                             [11-73]
SVF 2.836)
    1. The Stoics say that the leading part [of the soul], i.e., that which
produces presentations and assents and sense-perceptions and impulses,
is the highest part of the soul. And they call this "reason". 2. Seven parts
grow out of the leading part and extend to the body, just like the tentacles
from the octopus. Of the seven parts of the soul, five are the senses-
sight, smell, hearing, taste and touch. 3. Of these, sight is a pneuma
extending from the leading part to the eyes, hearing a pneuma extending
from the leading part to the ears, smell a pneuma extending from the
leading part to the nostrils, taste a pneuma extending from the leading
part to the tongue and touch a pneuma extending from the leading part
to the surface [of the skin] for the sensible contact with objects. 4. Of
the remaining parts, one is called "seed", which is itself a pneuma extend-
ing from the leading part to the testicles and the other, which was called
"vocal" by Zeno (which they also call "voice"), is a pneuma extending
from the leading part to the throat and tongue and the related organs.
The leading part itself, like <the sun> in the cosmos, dwells in our head
which is round.

Plotinus 4.7.7 (SVF 2.858)                                           [11-74]
   When a man is said to be in pain with respect to his finger, the pain
is surely in the finger, while surely they [the Stoics] will admit that the
perception of pain is in the leading part of the soul. Though the distressed
part is different from the pneuma, it is the leading part which perceives
and the whole soul suffers the same experience. How then does this
happen? They will say, by a transmission of the pneuma of the soul in
the finger which suffered first and passed it on to the next pneuma and
this one to another, until it arrives at the leading part.

Philo On the Posterity of Cain 126                                   [11-75]
(SVF 2.862)
   No one, at least no one in his senses, would say that the eyes see, but
rather that the mind [sees] through the eyes, nor that the ears hear, but
that the mind [hears] through the ears, nor that the nostrils smell but
that the leading part of the soul [smells] through the nostrils.
On Fate                                                                 179


On Fate
Epictetus Discourses 2.19.1-5                                       [11-76]
   1. The Master Argument [of Diodorus Cronos] seems to be be based
on premisses of this sort. There is a general conflict among these three
statements: [1] everything past and true is necessary; [2] the impossible
does not follow from the possible; [3] there is something possible which
neither is nor will be true. Seeing this conflict, Diodorus used the plausi-
bility of the first two statements to establish that only that which is or
will be true is possible. 2. But from among the [consistent] pairs [of
statements] one man will retain these: [3] that there is something possible
which neither is nor will be true and [2] that the impossible does not
follow from the possible; but [he would not concede] that [1] everything
past and true is necessary. This seems to be the position of Cleanthes
and his followers, and Anti pater generally agreed with it. 3. Others [will
accept] the other two, [3] that there is something possible which neither
is nor will be true and [1] that everything past and true is necessary;
[and they will concede] that the impossible follows from the possible. 4.
But it is impossible to retain all three of those statements because of
their general conflict with each other. 5. So if someone asks me, "which
pair do you retain?". I will answer him by saying that I do not know. I
have learned from research that Diodorus retained one pair, the followers
ofPanthoides and Cleanthes another, and the followers ofChrysippus an-
other.

Pseudo-Plutarch On Fate 574ef (SVF 2.912)                           [11-77]
   (547e) According to the opposing argument, the first and most impor-
tant point would seem to be that nothing happens uncaused, but according
to prior causes. Second, that this cosmos, which is itself coordinated and
sympathetic with itself, is administered by nature. Third, which would
seem rather to be additional evidence, is the fact that divination is in
good repute with all men because it really does exist, with divine coopera-
tion, and second that wise men are contented in the face of events, (547ยฃ)
since all of them occur according to [divine] allotment; and third, the
much-discussed point, that every proposition is true or false.

Theodoretus Graecarum A.ffectionum Cura                             [11-78]
6.14 (SVF 2.916)
   And Chrysippus the Stoic said that what is necessitated is no different
from what is fated, and that fate is an eternal, continuous and ordered
180                                                                        l/-78 to l/-83

motion [or change]. Zeno of Citium called fate a power capable of moving
matter, and gave to the same [force] the names providence and nature.
His successors said that fate was a rational principle for the things adminis-
tered by providence within the cosmos, and again in other treatises they
called fate a string of causes.

Aetius 1.28.4 (= Dox. Gr. p. 324; SVF 2.917)                                     [11-79]
  The Stoics say it is a string of causes, i.e., an ordering and connection
which is inescapable.

Alexander De Anima Mantissa CIAG Supp.                                           [11-80]
2.1 p. 185.1-5 (SVF 2.920)
   But it is conceded that all things which happen by fate occur in a
certain order and sequence and have an element of logical consequence
in them ... Anyway, they say that fate is a string of causes.

Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions. 34,                                          [11-81]
1049f-1050d (SVF 2.937)
   (1049ยฃ) But nevertheless one will have not just one or two occasions
but thousands, to address to Chrysippus this remark, which is now
praised: "You have said the easiest thing, in blaming the gods." For first,
in book one of his Physics he compares the eternity of motion to a posset 36
which spins and agitates the various things which come to pass in various
ways; then he says: (1050a) "Since the organization of the universe
proceeds thus, it is necessary for us to be such as we are, in accordance
with it, whether we are ill or lame, contrary to our individual nature, or
whether we have turned out to be grammarians or musicians." And again,
a bit further on: "and on this principle we will say similar things about
our virtue and our vice and, in general, about our skills or lack of them,
as I have said". And a bit further on, removing all ambiguity: "for it is
impossible for any of the parts, even the smallest one, to turn out differ-
ently than according to the common nature and its reason". That the
common nature and the (1050b) common reason of nature are fate and
providence and Zeus, even the Antipodeans know this; for the Stoics
prattle on about this everywhere and he says that Homer correctly said 37
"and Zeus' plan was being fulfilled", referring it to fate and the nature
of the universe according to which everything is ordered.

36. A drink composed of a suspension of solid particles in a fluid base.
37. Iliad 1.5.
On Fate                                                                  181

   How, then, can it be the case at one and the same time that god is
not partly responsible for anything shameful and that not even the smallest
thing can occur otherwise than according to the common nature and its
reason? For in everything which occurs surely there are some shameful
things too. And yet, Epicurus twists this way and that and exercises his
ingenuity (1050c) in his attempt to free and liberate voluntary action
from the eternal motion, so as not to leave vice free of blame, while
Chrysippus gives vice blatant freedom to say not only that it is necessary
and according to fate but even that it occurs according to god's reason
and the best nature. And this too is plain to see, when we provide the
following literal quotation: "for since the common nature extends into
everything, it will be necessary that everything which occurs in any way
in the universe and in any of its parts should occur according to it [the
common nature] and its reason, in proper and unhindered fashion, be-
cause there is nothing outside it which could hinder its organization nor
(1050d) could any of its parts be moved or be in a state otherwise than
according to the common nature."

Simplicius Comm. On Aristotle's Categories                            [11-82]
13a37 CIAG 8, pp. 406.34-407.5 (SVF 2.198)
   Concerning [pairs of] contradictories which bear on the future the
Stoics accept the same principle as they do for other statements. For
what is true of [pairs of] contradictories concerning things present and
past is also true, they say, for future contradictories themselves and their
parts. For either "it will be" or "it will not be" is true if they must be
either true or false. For they are fixed by the future events themselves.
And if there will be a sea-battle tomorrow, it is true to say that there
will be. But if there will not be a sea-battle, it is false to say that there
will be. Either there will or there will not be a battle; therefore, each
statement is either true or false.

Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions 1055de                             [11-83]
(SVF 2.202)
   (1055d) ... Surely his [Chrysippus'] account of possibility is in conflict
with his account of fate. (1055e) For if Diodorus' view of the possible
as "what either is or will be true" is not right but [Chrysippus' view is],
that "everything which permits of occurring even if it is not going to
occur is possible", then many things are possible which are not according
to fate. <Therefore, either> fate loses its character as unconquerable,
unforceable, and victorious over all things, or, if fate is as Chrysippus
claims, then "what permits of occurring" will often turn out to be
182                                                             l/-83 to l/-86

impossible. And everything true will be necessary, being gripped by the
most sovereign of necessities; while everything false will be impossible,
since the greatest cause opposes its being true.

Cicero On Fate 28-33 (SVF 2.955-956)                                   [11-84]

   28 .... Nor will the so-called "Lazy Argument" stop us. For a certain
argument is called the argos logos by the philosophers, and if we listened
to it we would never do anything at all in life. For they argue in the
following fashion: "if it is fated for you to recover from this illness
whether you call the doctor or not, you will recover; 29. similarly, if it
is fated for you not to recover from this illness whether you call the
doctor or not, you will not recover. And one of the two is fated. Therefore,
there is no point in calling the doctor". It is right to call this kind of
argument "lazy" and "slothful", because on the same reasoning all action
will be abolished from life. One can also change the form of it, so that
the word "fate" is not included and still keep the same sense, in this
way: "if from eternity this has been true, 'you will recover from that
disease whether you call a doctor or not', you will recover; similarly, if
from eternity this has been false, 'you will recover from that disease
whether you call the doctor or not' you will not recover. Et cetera."
    30. Chrysippus criticizes this argument. "For," he says, "some things
are simple, some conjoined. 'Socrates will die on that day' is simple.
Whether he does anything or not, the day of death is fixed for him. But
if it is fated, 'Oedipus will be born to Laius', it cannot be said 'whether
Laius lies with a woman or not'. For the events are conjoined and co-
fated." For that is how he refers to it, since it is fated thus, both that
Laius will lie with his wife and that Oedipus will be produced by her.
Just as, if it had been said, "Milo will wrestle at the Olympics" and
someone reported "therefore, he will wrestle whether or not he has an
opponent", he would be wrong. For "he will wrestle" is conjoined,
because there is no wrestling match without an opponent. "Therefore,
all the sophistries of that type are refuted in the same way. 'Whether
you call a doctor or not, you will recover' is fallacious; for calling the
doctor is fated just as much as recovering". Such situations, as I said,
he calls co-fated.
    31. Carneades [the Academic] did not accept this entire class [co-fated
events] and thought that the above argument had been constructed with
insufficient care. And so he approached the argument in another way,
not using any fallacious reasoning. This was the result: if there are
antecedent causes for everything that happens, then everything happens
within a closely knit web of natural connections. If this is so, then necessity
On Fate                                                                 183

causes everything. And if this is true there is nothing in our power.
There is, however, something in our power. But if everything happens
by fate, everything happens as a result of antecedent causes. Therefore,
it is not the case that whatever happens happens by fate. 32. This argument
cannot be made tighter. For if someone wished to turn the argument
around and say: if every future event is true from eternity so that whatever
should happen would certainly happen, then everything happens within
a closely knit web of natural connections, he would be speaking nonsense.
For there is a great difference between a natural cause making future
events true from eternity and future events which might be understood
to be true, without natural [cause] from eternity. Thus Carneades said
that not even Apollo is able to pronounce on any future events unless it
were those the causes of which are already contained in nature, so that
they would happen necessarily. 33. On what basis could even a god say
that Marcellus, who was three times a consul, would die at sea? This
was indeed true from eternity, but it did not have efficient causes. Thus
[Carneades] was of the opinion that if not even past events of which no
trace existed would be known to Apollo, how much less would he know
future events, for only if the efficient causes of any thing were known
would it then be possible to know what would happen in the future.
Therefore, Apollo could not predict anything regarding Oedipus, there
not being the requisite causes in nature owing to which it was necessary
that he would kill his father, or anything of this sort.

Aetius 1.29.7 (= Dox. Gr. p. 326; SVF 2.966)                         [11-85]
  Anaxagoras and the Stoics say that chance is a cause non-evident to
human calculation. For some things happen by necessity, some by fate,
some by intention, some by chance and some automatically.

Plutarch On Stoic Self-Contradictions                                [11-86]
1045b-c (SVF 2.973)
   (1045b) ... Some philosophers think that they can free our impulses
from being necessitated by external causes if they posit in the leading
part of the soul an adventitious motion which becomes particularly evident
in cases where things are indistinguishable. For when two things are
equivalent and equal in importance and it is necessary to take one of the
two, there being no cause which leads us to one or the other since they
do not differ from each other, this adventitious cause generates a swerve in
the soul all by itself(1045c) and so cuts through the stalemate. Chrysippus
argues against them, on the grounds that they are doing violence to
nature by [positing] something which is uncaused, and frequently cites
184                                                           l/-86 to l/-89

dice and scales and many other things which cannot fall or settle in
different ways at different times without some cause or difference, either
something which is entirely in the things themselves or something which
occurs in the external circumstances. For he claims that the uncaused
and the automatic are totally non-existent, and that in these adventitious
[causes] which some philosophers make up and talk about there are
hidden certain non-evident causes and they draw our impulse in one
direction or another without our perceiving it.

Alexander De Anima Mantissa CIAG Supp.                               [11-87]
2.1 p. 179.6-18 (SVF 2.967)
   To say that chance is a cause non-evident to human calculation is not
the position of men who posit some nature called chance, but of men
who say that chance consists in the relational disposition of men to the
causes ... For if they were to say not that chance is the cause which is
non-evident to some men, but the cause which is universally non-evident
to all men, they would not be admitting that chance exists at all, although
they grant that divination exists and suppose that it is able to make known
to other men the things which seemed to be non-evident.

Alexander of Aphrodisias On Fate 26,                                 [11-88]
196.21-197.3 Bruns (SVF 2.984)
   Perhaps it would not be a bad idea for us to take in hand and examine
how matters stand with the puzzles they put most confidence in; for
perhaps they will appear not too difficult to solve. One of these [difficul-
ties] is as follows: If, they say, things are in our power when we can also
do the opposite of those things, and it is upon such things that praise
and blame and encouragement and discouragement and punishment and
honours are bestowed, then it follows that being prudent and virtuous
will not be in the power of those who are prudent and virtuous; for [such
men] are no longer capable of receiving the vices opposite to their virtues.
And the same point applies to the vices of bad men; for it is no longer
in the power of such men to cease being bad. But it is absurd to say that
the virtues and vices are not in our power, and that they are not the
objects of praise and blame. Therefore, 'what is in our power' is not
like that.

Aulus Gellius 7.2 (SVF 2.1000)                                       [11-89]
   1. Chrysippus, the chief Stoic philosopher, defines fate (heimarmene
in Greek) roughly as follows: "Fate," he says, "is a sempiternal and
On Fate                                                                  185

unchangeable series and chain of things, rolling and unravelling itself
through eternal sequences of cause and effect, of which it is composed
and compounded" ....
   4. But authors from other schools make this objection to this definition.
5. "If," they say, "Chrysippus thinks that everything is moved and
governed by fate and the sequences and revolutions of fate cannot be
turned aside or evaded, then men's sins and misdeeds should not rouse
our anger, nor should they be attributed to men and their wills but to a
kind of necessity and inevitability which comes from fate, mistress and
arbiter of all things, by whose agency all that will be is necessary. And
therefore the penalties applied by the law to the guilty are unfair, if men
do not turn to misdeeds voluntarily but are dragged by fate."
   6. Against this position Chrysippus made many sharp and subtle argu-
ments. But this is the gist of all he said on the topic: 7. although, he
said, it is true that by fate all things are forced and linked by a necessary
and dominant reason, nevertheless the character of our minds is subject
to fate in a manner corresponding to their nature and quality. 8. For if
our minds were originally formed by nature in a sound and useful manner
then they pass on all the force of fate which imposes on us from outside
in a relatively unobjectionable and more acceptable way. But if, on the
other hand, they are rough and untrained and uncouth, supported by no
good training, then even if the blows of fated misfortune which strike
them are trivial or non-existent these men will plunge headlong into
constant misdeeds and errors because of their own ineptitude and their
voluntary impulse. 9. But this state of affairs is itself brought about by
that natural and necessary sequence of cause and effect which is called
fate. 10. For it is by the very nature of the case fated and determined
that bad characters should not be free of misdeeds and errors.
   11. He then uses a quite appropriate and clever illustration of this
state of affairs. "Just as," he says, "if you throw a cylindrical stone
down a steep slope, you are indeed the cause and origin of its descent,
nevertheless the stone afterwards rolls down not because you are still
doing this, but because such is its nature and the 'rollability' of its form:
similarly, the order and reason and necessity of fate sets in motion the
general types and starting points of the causes, but each man's own will
[or decisions] and the character of his mind govern the impulses of our
thoughts and minds and our very actions."
   12. He then adds these words, which are consistent with what I have
said: "So the Pythagoreans too said, 'You shall know that men have woes
which they chose for themselves', since the harm suffered by each man
is in his own power and since they err and are harmed voluntarily and
by their own plan and decision."
186                                                          l/-89 to l/-90

   13. Therefore he says that we ought not to tolerate or listen to men
who are wicked or lazy and guilty and shameless, who when convicted
of misdeeds take refuge in the necessity of fate as in the asylum of a
religious sanctuary and say that their worst misdeeds should be laid at
the door, not of their own recklessness, but of fate.
   14. And that most wise and ancient poet [Homer] was the first to make
this point, in the verses which follow:

          It makes me furious! how mortals blame the gods! For they
          say that their troubles come from us; but they incur pains on
          their own beyond their allotment, because of their
          wickedness.

   15. And so Cicero, in his book entitled On Fate, when he said that
the question was very obscure and complex, says also in these words that
even the philosopher Chrysippus did not get clear on the problem:
"Chrysippus, sweating and toiling to discover how he might explain that
everything happens by fate and yet that there is something in our own
power, gets tangled up in this manner."

Cicero On Fate 39-44 (SVF 2.974)                                   [11-90]
   39. Since there were two opinions of the older philosophers, one
belonging to those men who believed that everything occurred by fate
in such a way that the fate in question brought to bear the force of
necessity (this was the view of Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles and
Aristotle), the other of those who held that there were voluntary motions
of the mind without fate, Chrysippus, it seems to me, wanted to strike
a middle path, like an informal arbitrator, but attached himself more to
the group which wanted the motions of the mind to be free of necessity.
But while employing his own terms he slipped into such difficulties that
he wound up unwillingly confirming the necessity of fate.
   40. And, if you please, let us see how this occurs in the case of
assent, which we discussed at the start of our discourse. For the older
philosophers who held that everything occurred by fate said that it
occurred by force and necessity. Those who disagreed with them freed
assent from fate and denied that if fate applied to assent it could be free
of necessity and so they argued thus: "if everything happens by fate,
everything occurs by an antecedent cause and if impulse [is caused], then
also what follows from impulse [is caused]; therefore, assent too. But if

38. Odyssey 1.32-34.
On Fate                                                                 187

the cause of impulse is not in us then impulse itself is not in our own
power; and if this is so, not even what is produced by impulse is in our
power; therefore, neither assent nor action is in our power. From which
it follows that neither praise nor blame nor honours nor punishments
are fair". Since this is wrong, they think that it is a plausible conclusion
that it is not the case that whatever happens happens by fate.
   41. Chrysippus, however, since he both rejected necessity and wanted
that nothing should occur without prior causes, distinguished among the
kinds of causes in order both to escape from necessity and to retain fate.
"For," he said, "some causes are perfect and principal, while others are
auxiliary and proximate. Therefore, when we say that all things occur
by fate by antecedent causes, we do not want the following to be under-
stood, viz. that they occur by perfect and principal causes; but we mean
this, that they occur by auxiliary and proximate causes". And so his
response to the argument which I just made is this: if everything occurs
by fate it does indeed follow that everything occurs by antecedent causes,
but not by principal and perfect causes. And if these are not themselves
in our power it does not follow that not even impulse is in our power.
But this would follow if we were saying that everything occurred by
perfect and principal causes with the result that, since these causes are
not in our power, <not even [impulse] would be in our power>. 42.
Therefore, those who introduce fate in such a way that they connect
necessity to it are subject to the force of that argument; but those who
will not say that antecedent causes are perfect and principal will not be
subject to the argument at all.
   As to the claim that assents occur by antecedent causes, he says that
he can easily explain the meaning of this. For although assent cannot
occur unless it is stimulated by a presentation, nevertheless since it has
that presentation as its proximate cause and not as its principal cause, it
can be explained in the way which we have been discussing for some
time now, just as Chrysippus wishes. It is not the case that the assent
could occur if it were not stimulated by a force from outside (for it is
necessary that an assent should be stimulated by a presentation); but
Chrysippus falls back on his cylinder and cone. These cannot begin to
move unless they are struck; but when that happens, he thinks that it is
by their own natures that the cylinder rolls and the cone turns.
   43. "Therefore," he says, "just as he who pushed the cylinder gave it
the start of its motion, he did not, however, give it its "rollability", so
a presentation which strikes will certainly impress its object and as it
were stamp its form on the mind, but our assent will be in our own
power and the assent, just as was said in the case of the cylinder, when
struck from without, will henceforth be moved by its own force and
188                                                            l/-90 to l/-92

nature. But if something were produced without an antecedent cause,
then it would be false that everything occurs by fate. But if it is probable
that a cause precedes all things which occur, what could block the conclu-
sion that all things occur by fate? Let it only be understood what difference
and distinction there is among causes."
   44. Since Chrysippus has clarified this, if his opponents who say that
assents do not occur by fate were nevertheless to concede that they do
not occur without a presentation as antecedent [cause]-then that is a
different argument; but if they grant that presentations precede and
nevertheless that assents do not occur by fate, on the grounds that it is
not that proximate and immediate [kind of] cause which moves the assent,
note that they are really saying the same thing [as Chrysippus]. For
Chrysippus, while granting that there is in the presentation a proximate
and immediate cause of assent, will not grant that this cause necessitates
assent in such a way that, if all things occur by fate, all things would
occur by antecedent and necessary causes. And similarly the opponents,
who disagree with him while conceding that assents do not occur without
prior presentations, will say that, if everything occurs by fate in the sense
that nothing occurs without a prior cause, it must be granted that all
things occur by fate.
   From this it is easy to understand, since both sides get the same result
once their opinions are laid out and clarified, that they disagree verbally
but not in substance.

Plutarch Stoic Self-Contradictions 41,                               [11-91]
1055f-1056d (SVF 2.935, 937, 994, 997)
   (1055ยฃ) ... Moreover, what is said about presentations is also in
powerful opposition to [Chrysippus' view of] fate. For wanting to prove
that presentation is not a sufficient cause of assent, he has said that wise
men will be doing harm by producing false presentations in others if
presentations are sufficient to produce acts of assent; for wise men often
use a falsehood when (1056a) dealing with base men and produce a
persuasive presentation which is, however, not the cause of assent (since
in that case [a presentation] would also be the cause of false belief and
deception). So, if someone transfers this statement from the wise man
to fate and should say that the assents do not arise because of fate, since
in that case false assents and beliefs and deceptions would arise because
of fate, and people would be harmed because of fate, then the argument
which exempts the wise man from doing harm demonstrates at the same
time that fate is not the cause of everything. For if people do not hold
opinions and are not harmed because of fate, (1056b) it is clear that they
On Fate                                                                   189

also do not act correctly or have correct opinions or hold stable beliefs
or get benefit because of fate, but instead the claim that fate is the cause
of everything goes up in smoke. And someone who says that Chrysippus
did not make fate the sufficient cause of these things but only the initiating
cause will also prove that he is in contradiction with himself where he
extravagantly praises Homer39 who speaks about Zeus, "So accept what-
ever he sends to each of you, of evil" or of good; and Euripides 40 [who
says], "0 Zeus, why then should I say that miserable men have any
intelligence? For we depend on you and do whatever you happen to
think."
   (1056c) And Chrysippus himself writes many things in agreement with
these views and finally says that nothing, not even the smallest thing, is
in any state or motion otherwise than according to the reason of Zeus,
who is the same as fate.
   Again, then, the initiating cause is weaker than the sufficient and is
feeble when it is dominated by other causes which impede it, but by
claiming that fate is an unconquerable, unhinderable, and unswerving
cause, he calls it Unturning, Inevitable, Necessity, and Firmly Fixed
(since it sets a limit on everything).
   Should we, then, say that assents are not in our power, and neither
are virtues, vices, (1056d) [morally] perfect actions, and [moral] errors;
or should we say that fate is deficient and that the Firmly Fixed is
indeterminate and that Zeus' motions and dispositions are unfulfilled?
For some of these result from fate being a sufficient cause, some from
it merely being an initiating cause. For if it is a sufficient cause of all
things it destroys what is in our power and the voluntary, and if it is
initiating, it ruins the unhinderable and fully effective character of fate.
For not once or twice but everywhere, and especially in all his treatises
on physics he has written that there are many hindrances to particular
natures and motions, but that there are no obstacles to the nature and
motion of the universe as a whole.

Hippolytus Philosophoumena 21 (= Dox. Gr.                             [11-92]
571.11-16, SVF 2.975)
   They [Zeno and Chrysippus] support the claim that everything hap-
pens by fate by using this example. It is as though a dog is tied behind
a cart. If he wants to follow, he is both dragged and follows, exercising
his autonomy in conjunction with necessity. But if he does not wish to


39. Iliad 15.109.
40. Suppliants 734--6, slightly altered.
190                                                            l/-92 to l/-94

follow, he will nevertheless be forced to. The same thing happens in the
case of men. Even if they do not want to follow, they will nevertheless
be forced to go along with what has been destined.

Diogenianus in Eusebius Prep. Ev. 6.8,                               [11-93]
265d-266d (SVF 2.998)
   So in book one of his [Chrysippus'] On Fate he used proofs of this
nature, and in book two he tries to resolve the absurdities which seem
to follow on the thesis that all things are necessitated, which we listed
at the beginning: for example, the destruction of our own initiative
concerning criticism and praise and encouragement and everything which
seems to happen by our own agency.
   So, in book two he says that it is obvious that many things occur by
our own initiative, but nonetheless these are co-fated with the administra-
tion of the universe. And he uses illustrations like these.
   The non-destruction of one's coat, he says, is not fated simply, but
co-fated with its being taken care of, and someone's being saved from
his enemies is co-fated with his fleeing those enemies; and having children
is co-fated with being willing to lie with a woman. For just as if, he says,
someone says that Hegesarchus the boxer will leave the ring completely
untouched, it would be strange for him to think that Hegesarchus should
fight with his fists down because it was fated that he should get off
untouched (the man who made the assertion saying this because of the
fellow's extraordinary protection from being punched), so too the same
thing holds in other cases. For many things cannot occur without our
being willing and indeed contributing a most strenuous eagerness and
zeal for these things, since, he says, it was fated for these things to occur
in conjunction with this personal effort .... But it will be in our power,
he says, with what is in our power being included in fate.



Ethics
Diogenes Laertius 7.84-131                                           [11-94]

   84. They divide the ethical part of philosophy into these topics: on
impulse, on good and bad things, on passions, on virtue, on the goal, on
primary value, on actions, on appropriate actions, on encouragements
and discouragements to actions. This is the subdivision given by the
followers of Chrysippus, Archedemus, Zeno of Tarsus, Apollodorus,
Ethics                                                                     191

Diogenes, Anti pater and Posidonius. For Zeno of Citium and Cleanthes,
as might be expected from earlier thinkers, made less elaborate distinctions
in their subject matter. But they did divide both logic and physics.
   85. They say that an animal's first [or primary] impulse is to preserve
itself, because nature made it congenial to itself from the beginning, as
Chrysippus says in book one of On Goals, stating that for every animal
its first [sense of] congeniality is to its own constitution and the reflective
awareness of this. For it is not likely that nature would make an animal
alienated from itself, nor having made the animal, to make it neither
congenial to nor alienated from itself. Therefore, the remaining possibility
is to say that having constituted the animal she made it congenial to
itself. For in this way it repels injurious influences and pursues that
which is congenial to it.
   The Stoics claim that what some people say is false, viz. that the
primary [or first] impulse of animals is to pleasure. 86. For they say that
pleasure is, if anything, a byproduct which supervenes when nature itself,
on its own, seeks out and acquires what is suitable to [the animal's]
constitution. It is like the condition of thriving animals and plants in top
condition. And nature, they say, did not operate differently in the cases
of plants and of animals; for it directs the life of plants too, though
without impulse and sense-perception, and even in us some processes
are plant-like. When, in the case of animals, impulse is added (which
they use in the pursuit of things to which they have an affinity), then
for them what is natural is governed by what is according to impulse.
When reason has been given to rational animals as a more perfect governor
[of life], then for them the life according to reason properly becomes
what is natural for them. For reason supervenes on impulse as a craftsman.
87. Thus Zeno first, in his book On the Nature ofMan, said that the goal
was to live in agreement with nature, which is to live according to virtue.
For nature leads us to virtue. And similarly Cleanthes in On Pleasure
and Posidonius and Hecaton in their books On the Goal.
   Again, "to live according to virtue" is equivalent to living according
to the experience of events which occur by nature, as Chrysippus says
in book one of his On Goals. 88. For our natures are parts of the nature
of the universe. Therefore, the goal becomes "to live consistently with
nature", i.e., according to one's own nature and that of the universe,
doing nothing which is forbidden by the common law, which is right
reason, penetrating all things, being the same as Zeus who is the leader
of the administration of things. And this itself is the virtue of the happy
man and a smooth flow of life, whenever all things are done according
to the harmony of the daimon in each of us with the will of the
192                                                                     l/-94

administrator of the universe. So Diogenes says explicitly that the goal
is reasonable behaviour in the selection of things according to nature,
and Archedemus [says it is] to live carrying out all the appropriate acts.
   89. By nature, in consistency with which we must live, Chrysippus
understands both the common and, specifically, the human nature. Clean-
thes includes only the common nature, with which one must be consistent,
and not the individual. And virtue is a disposition in agreement. And it
is worth choosing for its own sake, not because of some fear or hope or
some extrinsic consideration. And happiness lies in virtue, insofar as
virtue is the soul [so] made [as to produce] the agreement of one's
whole life.
   And the rational animal is corrupted, sometimes because of the persua-
siveness of external activities and sometimes because of the influence of
companions. For the starting points provided by nature are uncorrupted.
   90. Virtue in one sense is generally a sort of completion [or: perfection]
for each thing, for example, of a statue. And there is also non-intellectual
virtue, for example, health; and intellectual virtue, for example, prudence.
For in book one of his On Virtues Hecaton says that those virtues which
are constituted out of theorems are knowledge-based and intellectual, for
example prudence and justice; but those which are understood by exten-
sion from those which are constituted out of theorems are non-intellectual,
for example health and strength. For it turns out that health follows on
and is extended from temperance, which is intellectual, just as strength
supervenes on the building of an arch. 91. They are called non-intellectual
because they do not involve assent, but they supervene even in base
people, as health and courage do.
   Posidonius (in book one of his Ethical Discourse) says that a sign that
virtue exists is the fact that the followers of Socrates, Diogenes, and
Antisthenes were making [moral] progress; and vice exists because it is
the opposite of virtue. And that it is teachable (virtue, I mean) Chrysippus
says in book one of his On the Goal, and so do Cleanthes and Posidonius
in their Protreptics and Hecaton too. It is clear that it is teachable because
base men become good.
   92. Panaetius, anyway, says that there are two [kinds of] virtues,
theoretical and practical; others [divide virtue into] logical, physical and
ethical. Posidonius' followers [say there are] four, and those of Cleanthes
and Chrysippus and Antipater [say there are even] more. But Apollo-
phanes says there is one virtue, viz. prudence.
   Of virtues, some are primary and some are subordinate to these. The
primary are these: prudence, courage, justice and temperance. Forms of
these are magnanimity, self-control, endurance, quick-wittedness, and
deliberative excellence. And prudence is the knowledge of which things
Ethics                                                                    193

are good and bad and neither; courage is knowledge of which things are
to be chosen and avoided and neither; and .... [There is a lacuna here.]
93. magnanimity is knowledge or a condition which makes one superior
to those things which happen alike to base and virtuous men; self-control
is an unsurpassable disposition [concerned with] what accords with right
reason, or a condition which cannot be defeated by pleasures; endurance
is knowledge of or a condition [concerned with] what one is to stand
firmly by and what is not and neither; quick-wittedness is a condition
which instantly finds out what the appropriate action is; and deliberative
excellence is a knowledge of how to consider the type and manner of
actions which we must perform in order to act advantageously.
   Correspondingly, of vices too some are primary and some are subordi-
nate. For example, imprudence, cowardice, injustice and wantonness are
primary, and lack of self-control, slow-wittedness and poor deliberation
are subordinate. Those vices whose [counterpart] virtues are forms of
knowledge are forms of ignorance.
   94. Good is in general that from which there is something beneficial;
in particular it is either the same as or not different from benefit. Hence,
virtue itself and the good, which participates in it, are spoken of in
these three ways: [1] the good is that from which being benefitted is a
characteristic result; [2] it is that according to which [being benefitted] is
a characteristic result, for example, action according to virtue; [3] it is
he by whom [being benefitted is a characteristic result]; and "by whom"
means, for example, the virtuous man who participates in virtue.
   They give another particular definition of the good, as follows: "that
which is perfectly in accord with nature for a rational being, qua rational".
And virtue is such a thing, so that virtuous actions and virtuous men
participate [in it]; and its supervenient byproducts are joy and good
spirits and the like. 95. Similarly, of bad things some are imprudence,
cowardice, injustice and the like; and vicious actions and base men partici-
pate in vice; and its supervenient byproducts are low spirits and depression
and the like.
   Again, some goods are in the soul, some are external, and some are
neither in the soul nor external. The ones in the soul are virtues and
virtuous actions; the external are: having a virtuous fatherland and a
virtuous friend and their happiness; those which are neither external nor
in the soul are: for someone, in and for himself, to be virtuous and to
be happy. 96. Conversely, some bad things are in the soul, i.e., vices and
vicious actions; the external ones are having an imprudent fatherland
and an imprudent friend and their unhappiness; those which are neither
external nor in the soul are for someone, in and for himself, to be base
and to be unhappy.
194                                                                     l/-94

   Again, of goods some are final and some are instrumental and some
are both final and instrumental. So a friend and the benefits derived from
him are instrumental; but confidence and prudence and freedom and
enjoyment and good spirits and freedom from pain and every virtuous
action are final. 97. <The virtues> are both instrumental and final goods.
For in that they produce happiness they are instrumental goods, and in
that they fulfil it, such that they are parts of it, they are final goods.
Similarly, of bad things some are final and some are instrumental and
some are both. For an enemy and the harm derived from him are instru-
mental; but feelings of shock and lowliness and servitude and lack of
enjoyment and low spirits and pain and every vicious action are final.
<The vices> are both, since in that they produce unhappiness they are
instrumental, and in that they fulfil it, such that they are parts of it, they
are final.
   98. Again of goods in the soul some are conditions and some are
dispositions and some are neither conditions nor dispositions. The virtues
are dispositions, practices are conditions, and activities are neither condi-
tions nor dispositions. Generally, having good children and a good old
age are mixed goods, while knowledge is a simple good. And the virtues
are constant [goods], but there are ones which are not constant, such as
joy and walking.
   Every good is advantageous and binding and profitable and useful and
well-used and honourable and beneficial and worth choosing and just.
99. [A good is] advantageous because it brings such things as we are
benefitted by when they occur; binding because it holds together in cases
where this is needed; profitable because it pays back what is expended
on it, so that it exceeds in benefit a mere repayment of the effort; useful
because it makes available the use of a benefit; well-used because it
renders the use [of it] praiseworthy; honourable because it is symmetrical
with its own use; beneficial because it is such as to benefit; worth choosing
because it is such that it is reasonable to choose it; just because it is
consonant with law and instrumental to a [sense of] community.
   100. They say that the perfect good is honourable because it has all
the features sought by nature or because it is perfectly symmetrical.
There are four forms of the honourable: just, courageous, orderly, knowl-
edgeable. For honourable actions are completed in these [forms]. Analo-
gously, there are also four forms of the shameful: the unjust, the cowardly,
the disorderly and the senseless. The honourable uniquely means that
which makes those who possess it praiseworthy; or a good which is worthy
of praise; otherwise: what is naturally well suited for its own function;
otherwise: that which adorns [its possessor], [as] when we say that only
the wise man is good and honourable.
Ethics                                                                  195

   101. They say that only the honourable is good, according to Hecaton
in book three of his On Goods and Chrysippus in his book On the Honour-
able; and this is virtue and that which participates in virtue; this is the
same as [saying] that everything good is honourable and that the good
is equivalent to the honourable-which is equal to it. For "since it is
good, it is honourable; but it is honourable; therefore, it is good." They
think that all goods are equal and that every good is worth choosing in
the highest degree and does not admit of being more or less intense. They
say that of existing things, some are good, some bad, and some neither.
   102. The virtues-prudence, justice, courage, temperance and the
others-are good; and their opposites-imprudence, injustice and the
others-are bad; neither good nor bad are those things which neither
benefit nor harm, such as life, health, pleasure, beauty, strength, wealth,
good reputation, noble birth, and their opposites death, disease, pain,
ugliness, weakness, poverty, bad reputation, low birth and such things,
as Hecaton says in book seven of his On the Goal, and Apollodorus in
his Ethics and Chrysippus. For these things are not good, but things
indifferent in the category of preferred things. 103. For just as heating,
not cooling, is a property of the hot, so benefitting, not harming, is a
property of the good; but wealth and health do not benefit any more
than they harm; therefore, neither wealth nor health is good. Again, they
say that what can be used [both] well and badly is not good; but it is
possible to use wealth and health [both] well and badly; therefore, wealth
and health are not good. Posidonius, however, says that these things too
are in the class of goods. But Hecaton in book nine of On Goods and
Chrysippus in his On Pleasure deny even of pleasure that it is a good;
for there are also shameful pleasures, and nothing shameful is good. 104.
To benefit is to change or maintain something in accordance with virtue,
while to harm is to change or maintain something in accordance with vice.
   Things indifferent are spoken of in two senses; in the simple sense,
those things which do not contribute to happiness or unhappiness [are
indifferent], as is the case with wealth, reputation, health, strength and
similar things. For it is possible to be happy even without these things,
since it is a certain kind of use of them which brings happiness or
unhappiness. But in another sense things indifferent are what do not
stimulate an impulse either towards or away from something, as is the
case with having an odd or even number of hairs on one's head, or with
extending or retracting one's finger; the first sort [ofindifferents] are no
longer called indifferent in this sense; for they do stimulate impulses
towards or away from [themselves]. 105. That is why some of them are
selected <and some> are rejected, while those others leave one equally
balanced between choice and avoidance.
196                                                                    l/-94

   Of things indifferent, they say that some are preferred and some
rejected; preferred are those which have value, rejected are those which
have disvalue. They say that one sort of value is a contribution to the
life in agreement, which applies to every good; but another sort is a
certain intermediate potential or usefulness which contributes to the life
according to nature, as much as to say, just that [value] which wealth
and health bring forward for [promoting] the life according to nature. And
another sense of value is the appraiser's value, which a man experienced in
the facts would set, as when one says that wheat is exchanged for barley
with a mule thrown in.
    106. Preferred things are those which also have value; for example,
among things of the soul, natural ability, skill, [moral] progress and
similar things; among bodily things life, health, strength, good condition,
soundness, beauty and the like; among external things wealth, reputation,
noble birth, and similar things. Rejected are, among things of the soul,
natural inability, lack of skill and similar things; among bodily things
death, disease, weakness, bad condition, being maimed, ugliness and
similar things; among external things poverty, lack of reputation, low
birth and the like. Those things which are in neither category are neither
preferred nor rejected.
    107. Again, of preferred things, some are preferred for themselves,
some because of other things, and some both for themselves and because
of other things. For themselves, natural ability, [moral] progress and
similar things; because of other things, wealth, noble birth, and similar
things; for themselves and because of other things, strength, good percep-
tual abilities, soundness. [Those which are preferred] for themselves
[are preferred] because they are according to nature; [those which are
preferred] because of other things, [are preferred] because they produce
a significant amount of utility; the same applies to the rejected conversely.
   Again, an appropriate [action], they say, is that which, when done,
admits of a reasonable defence, such as what is consistent in life, and
this extends also to plants and animals. For appropriate [actions] are
observable in these too.
    108. The appropriate was first so named by Zeno and the term is
derived from [the expression] "extending [or applying] to certain people".
It is an action congenial to arrangements which are according to nature.
For of actions performed according to impulse [i.e., voluntarily], some
are appropriate and some inappropriate <and some are neither appropriate
nor inappropriate>.
   Appropriate [actions], then, are those which reason constrains [us] to
do, such as honouring our parents, brothers, fatherland, and spending
time with friends. Inappropriate are those which reason constrains [us]
Ethics                                                                    197

not [to do], such as things like this: neglecting our parents, ignoring our
brothers, being out of sympathy with our friends, overlooking [the inter-
ests of] our fatherland and such things. 109. Neither appropriate nor
inappropriate are those which reason neither constrains us to perform
nor forbids, such as picking up a small stick, holding a writing instrument
or scraper and things similar to these.
   And some are appropriate without regard to [special] circumstances,
while some are conditioned by circumstances. Those which [are appro-
priate] without regard to [special] circumstances are these: looking out
for one's health and sense organs, and similar things. Those which are
conditioned by circumstances are maiming oneself and throwing away
one's possessions. The analogous [distinctions apply] too for the things
which are contrary to what is appropriate. Again, of appropriate [actions],
some are always appropriate and some not always. And living according
to virtue is always appropriate, but asking questions and answering and
walking and similar things are not always [appropriate]. The same reason-
ing applies to inappropriate [actions]. 110. And there is also a kind of
appropriate [action] among intermediates, such as the obedience of boys
to their attendants.
   They say that the soul has eight parts; for its parts are the five sense
organs and the vocal part and the thinking part (which is the intellect
itself) and the generative part. And corruption afflicts the intellect because
of falsehoods, and from [such a mind] there arise many passions and
causes of instability. Passion itself is, according to Zeno, the irrational
and unnatural movement of a soul; or, an excessive impulse.
   According to Hecaton in book two of his On Passions and Zeno in his
On Passions, the most general [classification] of the passions is into four
types: 111. pain, fear, desire, pleasure. They believe that the passions
are judgements, as Chrysippus says in his On Passions; for greed is a
supposition that money is honourable, and similarly for drunkenness and
wantonness and the others.
   And pain is an irrational contraction; its forms are: pity, grudging,
envy, resentment, heavy-heartedness, congestion, sorrow, anguish, confu-
sion. Pity is a pain [felt] for someone who is suffering undeservedly;
grudging is a pain at the goods of other people; envy is a pain at someone
else having things which one desires oneself; resentment is a pain at
someone else too having what one also has oneself; 112. heavy-heartedness
is a pain which weighs one down; congestion is a pain which crowds one
and makes one short of room; sorrow is a persistent or intensifying pain
caused by brooding on something; anguish is a laborious pain; confusion
is an irrational pain which gnaws at one and prevents one from getting
a comprehensive view of one's current circumstances.
198                                                                         l/-94

   Fear is the expectation of something bad. These [forms] are brought
under fear: dread, hesitation, shame, shock, panic, agony. Dread is a fear
which produces fright; shame is a fear of bad reputation; hesitation is a
fear of future action; shock is a fear arising from the appearance of an
unfamiliar thing; 113. panic is fear in conjunction with a hastening of
the voice; agony is a fear ... [There is a lacuna here.]
   Desire is an irrational striving, and these [forms] are ranged under it:
want, hatred, quarrelsomeness, anger, sexual love, wrath, spiritedness.
Want is an unsuccessful desire and is as though it were separated from
its object yet vainly straining for and drawn to it; hatred is a progressive
and increasing desire for things to go badly for someone; quarrelsomeness
is a desire concerned with one's [philosophical] school; anger is a desire
for revenge on one who seems to have done an injustice inappropriately;
sexual love is a desire which does not afflict virtuous men, for it is an
effort to gain love resulting from the appearance of [physical] beauty.
114. Wrath is long-standing and spiteful anger which just waits for its
chance, as is apparent in these lines [Iliad 1.81-2]:

           For even if he swallows his resentment for today,
           still he will retain his spite in the future, until it is satisfied.

And spiritedness is anger just beginning.
   Pleasure is an irrational elation over what seems to be worth choosing;
under it are ranged enchantment, mean-spirited satisfaction, enjoyment,
rapture. Enchantment is a pleasure which charms one through the sense
of hearing; mean-spirited satisfaction is pleasure at someone else's misfor-
tunes; enjoyment is, as it were, a turning/1 a kind of incitement of the
soul to slackness; rapture is a breakdown of virtue.
   115. As there are said to be ailments in the body, such as gout and
arthritis, so too in the soul there are love of reputation and love of
pleasure and the like. For an ailment is a disease coupled with weakness
and a disease is a strong opinion about something which seems to be
worth choosing. And as in the body there are certain predispositions [to
disease], for example catarrh and diarrhoea, so too in the soul there are
tendencies, such as proneness to grudging, proneness to pity, quarrel-
someness and the like.
   116. There are also three good states [of the soul], joy, caution, and
wish. And joy is opposite to pleasure, being a reasonable elation; and
caution to fear, being a reasonable avoidance. For the wise man will not
be afraid in any way, but will be cautious. They say that wish is opposite

41. The pun is untranslatable.
Ethics                                                                   199

to desire, being a reasonable striving. So just as there are certain passions
which are forms of the primary ones, so too there are good states subordi-
nate to the primary; forms of wish are good will, kindliness, acceptance,
contentment; forms of caution are respect, sanctity; forms of joy are
enjoyment, good spirits, tranquillity.
   117. They say the wise man is also free of passions, because he is not
disposed to them. And the base man is 'free of passions' in a different
sense, which means the same as hard-hearted and cold. And the wise
man is free of vanity, since he is indifferent to good and ill repute. And
there is another type of freedom from vanity, i.e., heedlessness; such is
the base man. And they say that all virtuous men are austere because
they do not consort with pleasure nor do they tolerate hedonistic [actions
and attitudes] from others; and there is another kind of austerity, in the
same sense that wine is said to be 'austere' [harsh] (which is used medici-
nally, but not much for drinking).
   118. The virtuous are sincere and protective of their own improvement,
by means of a preparation which conceals what is base and makes evident
the good things which are there. And they are not phony; for they
have eliminated phoniness in their voice and appearance. And they are
uninvolved; for they avoid doing anything which is not appropriate. And
they will drink wine, but not get drunk. Again, [the wise man] will not
go mad, although he will get strange presentations because of an excess
of black bile or delirium-not in accordance with the account of what
is worth choosing, but rather contrary to nature. Nor indeed will the
wise man feel pain (since pain is an irrational contraction of the soul),
as Apollodorus says in his Ethics.
   119. And they are godly; for they have in themselves a kind of god.
And the base man is godless. And the godless are of two kinds, the one
opposite to him who is godly, and the one who denies that the godly
exists [i.e., the atheist]-and this is not a feature of every base man. The
virtuous are also pious, for they have experience of what is lawful with
respect to the gods and piety is a knowledge of how to serve the gods.
And indeed they will also sacrifice to the gods and be sanctified, since
they will avoid [moral] mistakes concerning the gods. And the gods
admire them, since they are holy and just towards the divine. And only
wise men are priests, for they have conducted an investigation into
sacrifices, foundations, purifications and the other matters which are
proper for the gods.
   120. The [Stoics] think that he [the wise man] will honour his parents
and brothers in the second place, after the gods. They also say that love
for one's children is natural to them and does not exist among the base.
They also see fit to believe that [moral] mistakes are equal, according to
200                                                                    l/-94

Chrysippus, in book four of his Ethical Investigations, and Persaeus and
Zeno. For if one truth is not more [true] than another, then neither is
one falsehood [falser] than another. So, neither is one deception [more
of a deception] than another nor is one [moral] mistake more [of a moral
mistake] than another. For he who is a hundred stades from Canopus
and he who is one stade away are [both] equally not in Canopus. So too
he who makes a larger [moral] mistake and he who makes a smaller one
are [both] equally not acting correctly. 121. But Heracleides of Tarsus,
the student of Antipater of Tarsus, and Athenodorus say that [moral]
mistakes are not equal.
   They say that the wise man will participate in politics unless something
prevents him, according to Chrysippus in book one of On Ways of Lift;
for he will restrain vice and promote virtue. And he will marry, as Zeno
says in his Republic, and have children. Again, the wise man will not
hold opinions, that is, he will not assent to anything which is false. And
he will live like a Cynic. For the Cynic life is a short road to virtue, as
Apollodorus says in his Ethics. And he will even taste human flesh in
special circumstances. He alone is free, and the base men are slaves; for
freedom is the authority to act on one's own, while slavery is the privation
of [the ability] to act on one's own. 122. There is also another kind of
slavery, in the sense of subordination [to another]; and a third, in the
sense of subordination [to] and possession [by another]; its opposite is
mastery [or: despotism], and this too is base. Not only are the wise free,
but they are also kings, since kingship is a form of rule not subject to
review, which only the wise could have, as Chrysippus says in his book
On the Fact That Zeno Used Terms in Their Proper Senses. For he says
that the ruler must know about good and bad things and that none of
the base understands these things. Similarly they alone are fit for office
or for jury duty, and [they alone are] public speakers, but none of the
base are. Again, they are also free of [moral] mistakes, since they are not
subject to making [moral] mistakes. 123. And they do no harm; for they
harm neither others nor themselves. But they are not prone to pity and
forgive no one. For they do not relax the penalties which the law fixes
as relevant, since giving in and pity and equity itself are the vapidity of
a soul which aims to substitute niceness for punishment; nor does he
think that [such punishments] are too severe. Again, the wise man is
astonished at none of the things which appear to be wonders, such as
the caves of Charon or tidal ebbs or hot springs or fiery exhalations [from
the earth]. Moreover, the virtuous man will not, they say, live in solitude;
for he is naturally made for [living in a] community and for action. He will,
moreover, submit to training for the sake of [building] bodily endurance.
   124. They say that the wise man will pray, asking for good things
Ethics                                                                   201

from the gods, according to Posidonius in book one of his On Appropriate
Actions and Hecaton in book three of On Paradoxes. And they say that
friendship exists only among virtuous men, because of their similarity.
They say that it is a sharing [or: community] of things needed for one's
life, since we treat our friends as ourselves. They declare that one's friend
is worth choosing for his own sake and that having many friends is a
good thing. And there is no friendship among base men and that no base
man has a friend. And all the imprudent are mad; for they are not prudent,
but do everything in accordance with madness, which is equivalent to
imprudence.
    125. The wise man does everything well, as we also say that Ismenias
plays all the flute tunes well. And everything belongs to wise men; for
the law has given them complete authority. Some things are said to belong
to the base, just as things are also said to belong to men who are unjust;
in one sense we say they belong to the state, in another sense to those
who are using them.
   They say that the virtues follow on each other and that he who has
one has them all. For their theoretical principles are common, as Chrysip-
pus says in book one of his On Virtues, and Apollodorus in his Physics
in the Old Stoa, and Hecaton in book three of On Virtues. 126. For he
who has virtue has a theoretical knowledge of what is to be done and
also practises it. And what one is to do and choose is also what one is
to endure for and stand firmly by and distribute, so that if he does some
things by way of choosing and others by way of enduring and others by
way of distributing and others by standing firmly by [something], one
will be prudent and courageous and just and temperate. Each of the
virtues is demarcated by a particular sphere of relevance, such as courage
which is concerned with what is to be endured for, prudence with what
is to be done and what not and what is neither; similarly, the other
virtues revolve around their proper objects. Deliberative excellence and
understanding follow on prudence, organization and orderliness on tem-
perance, even-handedness and fairness on justice, constancy and vigour
on courage.
    127. They believe that there is nothing in between virtue and vice,
while the Peripatetics say that [moral] progress is between virtue and
vice. For, they say, just as a stick must be either straight or crooked, so
must a man be either just or unjust and neither 'more just' nor 'more
unjust'; and the same for the other virtues. And Chrysippus says that
virtue can be lost, while Cleanthes says that it cannot be lost; [Chrysippus
says] that it can be lost owing to drunkenness and an excess of black
bile, while [Cleanthes says it] cannot, because [it consists in] secure
[intellectual] grasps; and it is worth choosing for its <own> sake. At any
202                                                            l/-94 to l/-95

rate, we are ashamed at things we do badly, as though we knew that only
the honourable is good. And it is sufficient for happiness, as Zeno says,
and Chrysippus in book one of On Virtues and Hecaton in book two of
On Goods. 128. "For if," he says, "magnanimity is sufficient for making
one superior to everything and if it is a part of virtue, virtue too is
sufficient for happiness, holding in contempt even those things which
seem to be bothersome." Panaetius, however, and Posidonius say that
virtue is not sufficient [for happiness], but that there is a need for health
and material resources and strength.
   They think that one employs virtue constantly, as the followers of
Cleanthes say. For it cannot be lost and the virtuous man always employs
a soul which is in perfect condition. And justice is natural and not
conventional, as are the law and right reason, as Chrysippus says in On
the Honourable. 129. They think that one [should] not give up philosophy
because of disagreement [among philosophers], since by this argument
one would give up one's whole life, as Posidonius too says in his Protreptics.
And Chrysippus says that general education is very useful.
   Again, they think that there is no justice between us and the other
animals, because of the dissimilarity [between us and them], as Chrysippus
says in book one of On Justice and Posidonius in book one of On Appro-
priate Action. And that the wise man will fall in love with young men
who reveal through their appearance a natural aptitude for virtue, as
Zeno says in the Republic and Chrysippus in book one of On Ways of
Life and Apollodorus in his Ethics.
   130. And sexual love is an effort to gain friendship resulting from the
appearance of beauty; and it is not directed at intercourse, but at friend-
ship. At any rate Thrasonides, although he had his beloved in his power,
kept his hands off her because she hated him. So sexual love is directed
at friendship, as Chrysippus says in his On Sexual Love; and it is not to
be blamed; and youthful beauty is the flower of virtue.
   There being three ways of life, the theoretical, the practical, and the
rational, they say that the third is to be chosen; for the rational animal
was deliberately made by nature for theory and action. And they say that
the wise man will commit suicide reasonably [i.e., for a good reason],
both on behalf of his fatherland and on behalf of his friends, and if he
should be in very severe pain or is mutilated or has an incurable disease.
   131. They think the wise men should have their wives in common, so
that anyone might make love to any woman, as Zeno says in the Republic
and Chrysippus says in his On the Republic; and again, so do Diogenes
the Cynic and Plato. And we shall cherish all the children equally, like
fathers, and the jealousy occasioned by adultery will be removed. The
Ethics                                                                 203

best form of government is that which is a blend of democracy and
monarchy and aristocracy.
  And this is the sort of thing they say in their ethical opinions, and
even more than this, together with the accompanying proofs. But let this
be our summary and elementary account.

John Stobaeus Anthology 2, 5-12                                    [11-95]
(pp. 57-116 W-H.)
   5. The views of Zeno and the rest of the Stoics about the ethical part
of philosophy.
   Sa. Zeno says that whatever participates in substance exists, and that
of things which exist some are good, some bad and some indifferent.
Good are things like this: prudence, temperance, justice, courage, and
everything which either is virtue or participates in virtue. Bad are things
like this: imprudence, wantonness, injustice, cowardice and everything
which either is vice or participates in vice. Indifferent are things like
this: life and death, good and bad reputation, pleasure and pain, wealth
and poverty, health and disease, and things similar to these.
   Sb. Of goods, some are virtues, some are not. Prudence, then, and
temperance <and justice> and courage <and great-heartedness and strength
of body and soul> are virtues; joy and good spirits and confidence and
wish and such things are not virtues. Of virtues, some are kinds of
knowledge of certain things and crafts, and some are not. Prudence, then,
and temperance and justice and courage are kinds of knowledge of certain
things and crafts; great-heartedness and strength of body and soul are
neither kinds of knowledge of certain things nor crafts. Analogously, of
bad things some are vices and some are not. Imprudence, then, and
injustice and cowardice and pusillanimity and powerlessness are vices;
pain and fear and such things are not vices. Of vices, some are kinds
of ignorance of certain things and the absence of skill, some are not.
Imprudence, then, and wantonness and injustice and cowardice are kinds
of ignorance of certain things and the absence of skill. Pusillanimity and
powerlessness <and weakness> are neither kinds of ignorance nor lacks
of skill.
   Sbl. Prudence is knowledge of what one is to do and not to do and
what is neither; or the knowledge in a naturally social <and rational>
animal of good things, bad things and what is neither (and they say that
this [definition] is to be understood [to apply] in the case of the rest of
the virtues too. Temperance is knowledge of what is to be chosen and
avoided and what is neither. Justice is knowledge of the distribution of
204                                                                  l/-95

proper value to each person. Courage is knowledge of what is terrible
and what is not terrible and what is neither. Folly is ignorance of good
things, bad things and what is neither, or ignorance of what one is to do
and not to do and what is neither. Wantonness is ignorance of what is
worth choosing and worth avoiding and what is neither. <Injustice is
ignorance of the distribution of proper value to each person>. Cowardice
is ignorance of what is terrible and what is not terrible and what is
neither. They define the other virtues and vices similarly, following what
has been said.
   5b2. Of virtues some are primary, some subordinate to the primary.
There are four primary virtues: prudence, temperance, courage, justice.
And prudence concerns appropriate acts; temperance concerns man's
impulses; courage concerns instances of standing firm; justice concerns
distributions. Of those subordinate to these, some are subordinate to
prudence, some to temperance, some to courage, some to justice. To
prudence are subordinate: deliberative excellence, good calculation,
quick-wittedness, good sense, <a good sense of purpose>, resourcefulness.
To temperance: organization, orderliness, modesty, self-control. To cour-
age: endurance, confidence, great-heartedness, stout-heartedness, love
of work. To justice: piety, good-heartedness, public-spiritedness, fair-
dealing. They say, then, that deliberative excellence is a knowledge of
the type and manner of actions which we must perform in order to act
advantageously; good calculation is knowledge which draws up a balance
and summarizes [the value of] what happens and is produced; quick-
wittedness is knowledge which instantly finds out what the appropriate
action is; good sense is knowledge <of what is better and worse; a good
sense of purpose is knowledge> which achieves its goal in each action;
resourcefulness is knowledge which discovers a way out of difficulties;
organization is knowledge of when one is to act and what [to do] after
what, and in general of the ordering of actions; orderliness is <knowledge>
of appropriate and inappropriate motions; modesty is knowledge which
is cautious about proper criticism; self-control is an unsurpassable knowl-
edge of what is revealed by right reason; endurance is knowledge which
stands by correct decisions; confidence is knowledge in virtue of which
we know that we shall meet with nothing which is terrible; great-hearted-
ness is knowledge which makes one superior to those things which natu-
rally occur among both virtuous and base men; stout-heartedness is
knowledge in a soul which makes it [the soul] invincible; love of work
is a knowledge which achieves its goal by labour, not being deterred by
hard work; piety is knowledge of service to the gods; good-heartedness
is knowledge which does good [to others]; public-spiritedness is knowl-
Ethics                                                                   205

edge of fairness in a community; fair-dealing is knowledge of how to
deal with one's neighbours blamelessly.
   5b3. The goal of all these virtues is to live consistently with nature.
Each one enables man to achieve this [goal] in its own way; for [man] has
from nature inclinations to discover what is appropriate and to stabilize his
impulses and to stand firm and to distribute [fairly]. And each of the
virtues does what is consonant [with these inclinations] and does its own
job, thus enabling man to live consistently with nature.
   5b4. They say, then, that these virtues just listed are perfect in our
lives and consist of theorems; but others supervene on them, which are
no longer crafts but rather certain capabilities which come as a result of
practice; for example, health of the soul and its soundness and strength
and beauty. For just as the health of the body is a good blend of the hot
and cold and wet and dry elements in the body, so too the health of the
soul is a good blend of the beliefs in the soul. And similarly, just as
strength of the body is a sufficient tension in the sinews, so too the
strength of the soul is a sufficient tension in judging and acting and in
not doing so. And just as beauty of the body is a symmetry of its limbs
constituted with respect to each other and to the whole, so too the beauty
of the soul is a symmetry of reason and its parts with respect to the
whole of it and to each other.
   5b5. All the virtues which are forms of knowledge and crafts have
common theorems and the same goal, as was said; and consequently they
are inseparable; for he who has one has them all, and he who acts with
one virtue acts with all. They differ from each other in their topics. For
the topics of prudence are, in the first instance, considering and doing
what is to be done, and in the second instance considering what one
should distribute <and what one should choose and what one should
endure>, for the sake of doing what is to be done without error. The
topic of temperance is, in the first instance, to make the impulses stable
and to consider them, and in the second instance [to consider] the topics
of the other virtues, for the sake of behaving without error in one's
impulses; and similarly courage in the first instance [considers] everything
which one should endure and in the second instance the topics of the
other virtues; and justice in the first instance looks to what is due to each
person, and in the second instance the other topics too. For all the virtues
consider the topics of all [the virtues] and those which are subordinate
to each other. For Panaetius used to say that what happened in the case
of the virtues was like what would happen if there were one target set
up for many archers and this target had on it lines which differed in
colour; and then each man were to aim at hitting the target-one by
206                                                                                  l/-95

striking the white line, it might be, another by striking the black and
another by striking another coloured line. For just as these [archers]
make their highest goal the hitting of the target, but each sets before
himself a different manner of hitting it, in the same way too all the
virtues make being happy their goal (and this lies in living in agreement
with nature) but each [virtue] achieves this in a different manner.
   5b6. Diogenes [of Babylon] says that there are two senses of 'things
worth choosing for their own sake and worth choosing in the final sense': 42
those set out in the previous division and those which have in themselves
the cause of being worth choosing (and this is a property of every
good thing).
   5b7. They say that there are several virtues and that they are inseparable
from each other. And that in substance they are identical with the leading
part of the soul; accordingly, [they say] that every virtue is and is called
a body; for the intellect and the soul are bodies. For they believe that
the inborn pneuma in us, which is warm, is soul. And they also want [to
claim] that the soul in us is an animal, since it lives and has sense-
perception; and especially so the leading part of it, which is called intellect.
That is why every virtue too is an animal, since in substance it is the
same as the intellect; accordingly, they say also that prudence acts pru-
dently. For it is consistent for them to speak thus.
   5b8. There is nothing between virtue and vice. For all men have from
nature inclinations towards virtue and, according to Cleanthes, are like
half-lines of iambic verse; hence, if they remain incomplete they are base,
but if they are completed [or: perfected] they are virtuous. They also
say that the wise man does everything in accordance with all the virtues;
for his every action is perfect, and so is bereft of none of the virtues.
   5b9. Consistently with this they hold also that he [the wise man] acts
with good sense and dialectically and sympotically and erotically; but the
erotic man is so called in two senses, the one who is virtuous and gets
his quality from virtue, and the one who is blamed, who gets his quality
from vice-a sort of sex-fiend. And sexual love is .... [There is a lacuna
here.] And being worthy of sexual love means the same as being worthy
of friendship and not the same as being worthy of being enjoyed; 43 for


42. telika, which probably means 'having the character of an ultimate goai'.The two senses
seem to be a narrow sense, which applies only to the virtues (below at Sg the virtues are
again said to be telika as well as instrumental) and a broader sense which includes all good
things, even the prudent man and the friend excluded from this category at Sg. We
dissent from Wachsmuth-Hense's correction of the the evidently corrupt text and follow
Heeren's emendation.
43. See 11-94 (D.L. 7.130).
Ethics                                                                                 207

he who is worthy of virtuous sexual love is [properly] worthy of sexual
love. They understand virtue exercised at a symposium as similar to
virtue in sexual matters, the one being knowledge which is concerned
with what is appropriate at a symposium, viz. of how one should run
symposia and how one should drink at them; and the other is knowledge
of how to hunt for talented young boys, which encourages them to
virtuous knowledge; and in general, knowledge of proper sexual activity.
That is why they say that the sensible man will engage in sexual activity.
And sexual activity just by itself is an indifferent, since at times it also
occurs among base men. But sexual love is not desire nor is it directed
at any base object, but is an effort to gain friendship resulting from the
appearance of beauty.
    SblO. And they also say that the wise man does everything which he
does well; obviously. For in the sense that we say that the flute player
or kithara player does everything well, it being understood that we refer
to what the one does in his flute playing and the other in his kithara
playing, in the same sense we say that the prudent man does everything
well, both what he does and, by Zeus, what he does not do too. 44 For
they thought that the opinion that the wise man does everything well
follows from his accomplishing everything in accordance with right reason
and, as it were, in accordance with virtue, which is a craft concerned
with one's entire life. Analogously, the base man too does everything
which he does badly and in accordance with all the vices.
    Sbll. They call 'practices' the love of music, of letters, of horses, of
hunting, and, broadly speaking, the so-called general crafts; they are not
knowledge, but they leave them in the class of virtuous conditions, and
consistently they say that only the wise man is a music lover and a lover
of letters, and analogously in the other cases. They give an outline
[definition] of a 'practice' as follows: a method using a craft or some part
[of a craft] which leads [us] to what is in accord with virtue.
    5b12. They say that only the wise man is a good prophet and poet
and public speaker and dialectician and critic, but not every [wise man],
since some of these [crafts] also require a mastery of certain theorems.
And prophecy is a theoretical knowledge of signs significant for human
life given by the gods or daimons. The forms of prophecy are simi-
larly [described].
    They say that only the wise man is a priest, but that no base man is.


44. The text is corrupt here and we translate the emendation of Hense; with their own
emendation Long and Sedley (The Hellenistic Philosophers [Cambridge 1987] vol. 1, 61G1
p. 380) translate: "does everything well, so far as concerns what he does, and not of course
also what he does not do."
208                                                                      l/-95

For the priest must be experienced in the laws concerning sacrifices and
prayers and purifications and foundations and all such things, and in
addition he also needs ritual sanctity and piety and experience of service
to the gods and [needs] to be intimate with the nature of divinity. And
the base man has not one of these features, and that is why all imprudent
men are impious. For impiety, being a vice, is ignorance of the service
to the gods, while piety is, as we said, a knowledge of service to the gods.
   Similarly they say that the base are not holy either; for holiness is
defined in outline as justice towards the gods, while the base deviate in
many respects from just action towards the gods, which is why they
are unholy and impure and unsanctified and defiled and to be barred
from festivals.
   For they say that participating at a festival is a [prerogative] of the
virtuous man, a festival being a time in which one should be concerned
with the divine for the sake of honouring [the gods] and for the sake of
the appropriate observations; and that is why the participant in a festival
should accommodate [himself] to this sort of role with piety.
   5b13. Again, they say that every base man is mad, being ignorant of
himself and his own concerns; and that is madness. And ignorance is the
vice opposite to prudence; and a certain relative disposition of this, which
makes one's impulses unstable and fluttery, is madness. That is why they
give an outline [definition] of madness as follows: a fluttery ignorance.
   Sc. Again, of good things, some are attributes of all prudent men all
the time, and some are not. Every virtue and prudent sense-perception
and prudent impulse and the like are attributes of all prudent men on
every occasion; but joy and good spirits and prudent walking are not
attributes of all prudent men and not all the time. Analogously, of bad
things too, some are attributes of all imprudent men all the time, and
some are not. Every vice and imprudent sense-perception and imprudent
impulse and the like are attributes of all imprudent men all the time;
but pain and fear and imprudent answering are not attributes of all
imprudent men and not on every occasion.
   Sd. All good things are beneficial and well-used and advantageous
and profitable and virtuous and fitting and honourable and congenial;
conversely, all bad things are harmful and ill-used and disadvantageous
and unprofitable and base and unfitting and shameful and uncongenial.
   They say that 'good' is used in many senses; the primary sense, which
plays a role like that of a source [for the other senses], is that which
is stated as follows: that from which it characteristically results that one is
benefitted or he by whom [it results that one is benefitted] (and what is
good in the primary sense is the cause). The second sense is that in
accordance with which it characteristically results that one is benefitted.
Ethics                                                                    209
A more general sense and one extending also to the previous cases is:
that which is such as to benefit. Similarly, the bad too is defined in outline
by analogy with the good: that from which or by whom it characteristically
results that one is harmed; and that in accordance with which it character-
istically results that one is harmed; more general than these is that which
is such as to harm.
    Se. Of good things, some are in the soul, some external, and some
neither in the soul nor external. In the soul are the virtues and <the>
virtuous conditions and in general praiseworthy activities. External are
friends and acquaintances and things like that. Neither in the soul nor
external are virtuous men and in general those who have the virtues.
Similarly, of bad things, some are in the soul, some external, and some
neither in the soul nor external. In the soul are the vices together with
wicked conditions and in general blameworthy activities. External are
enemies together with their various forms. Neither in the soul nor external
are base men and all those who have the vices.
    Sf. Of the goods in the soul, some are dispositions, some are conditions
but not dispositions, and some are neither conditions nor dispositions.
All the virtues are dispositions, while practices are only conditions but
not dispositions, for example, prophecy and the like. Virtuous activities,
for example, prudent action and the possession of temperance and the
like, are neither conditions nor dispositions. Similarly, of the bad things
in the soul, some are dispositions, some are conditions but not disposi-
tions, and some are neither conditions nor dispositions. All the vices are
dispositions, while tendencies, such as enviousness, resentfulness and
such things, are only conditions and not dispositions; so too for diseases
and ailments, such as greed, love of drink, and the like. Vicious activities
such as imprudent action, unjust action and things like that are neither
conditions nor dispositions.
    Sg. Of good things, some are final, some are instrumental, and some
are both. For the prudent man and one's friend are only instrumental
goods, but joy and good spirits and confidence and prudent walking are
only final goods; all the virtues are both instrumental and final goods,
since they both produce happiness and fulfil it, becoming parts of it.
Analogously, of bad things some are instrumental to unhappiness, some
are final, and some are both. For the imprudent man and one's enemy are
only instrumental bad things, but pain and fear and theft and imprudent
questioning and similar things <are only> final <bad things>; the vices are
both instrumental and final bad things, since they produce unhappiness
and fulfil it, becoming parts of it.
    Sh. Again, of good things some are worth choosing for their own sakes,
while some are instrumental; all those which are subject to reasonable
210                                                                    l/-95

choice for the sake of nothing else are worth choosing for their own
sakes, while those [which are subject to reasonable choice] because they
produce other things are said [to be worth choosing] in the instrumen-
tal sense.
   Si. And every good is worth choosing; for it is pleasing, and approved
of and praiseworthy. And every bad thing is worth avoiding. For the
good, in so far as it stimulates reasonable choice, is worth choosing; and
in so far as it is subject to choice without suspicion, it is pleasing ...
[There is a lacuna here.] ... and, moreover, in so far as one would
reasonably suppose that it is one of the products of virtue, <it is praise-
worthy>.
   Sk. Again, of good things some consist in motion and some consist in
a state. For such things as joy, good spirits and temperate conversation
consist in motion, while such things as a well-ordered quietude, undis-
turbed rest and a manly attention consist in a state. Of things which
consist in a state, some also consist in a condition, such as the virtues;
others are only in a state, such as the above-mentioned. Not only the
virtues consist in a condition, but also the crafts which are transformed
in the virtuous man by his virtue and so become unchangeable; for they
become quasi-virtues. And they say that the so-called practices are also
among the goods which consist in a condition, such as love of music,
love of letters, love of geometry, and the like. For there is a method
which selects those elements in such crafts which are congenial to virtue
by referring them to the goal of life.
   51. Again, of good things, some are [things which exist] in themselves
and some are relative dispositions. Knowledge, just action, and similar
things are [things which exist] in themselves. Honour, good will, friend-
ship and <agreement> are relative. And knowledge is a grasp which is
secure and unchangeable by argument; another definition: knowledge is a
complex system of grasps of this sort, such as knowledge of the particulars,
which is, in the virtuous man, rational; another definition: a complex
system of craftsmanlike knowledge, which provides its own stability,
which is what the virtues are like; another definition: a condition receptive
of presentations which is unchangeable by argument, which they say
consists in a tension and power [of the soul]. Friendship is a community
of life. Agreement is a sharing of opinions about things relevant to life.
Within friendship, familiarity is friendship with people who are well
known to you; habituation is friendship with people you have become
accustomed to; companionship is friendship by choice, such as that with
one's contemporaries; guest-friendship is friendship with foreigners; there
is also a kind of family friendship between relatives; and an erotic friend-
ship based on sexual love. And painlessness and organization are the
Ethics                                                                   211

same as temperance, just as insight and wits are [the same] as prudence
and sharing and generosity are [the same] as good-heartedness; for they
have been given names by reference to their relative dispositions. And
one must note this too in each of the other virtues.
   Sm. Again, of good things, some are unmixed, such as knowledge,
while others are mixed, such as having good children, a good old age, a
good life. Having good children is the natural and virtuous possession
of children; good old age is the natural and virtuous use of old age; and
similarly for a good life.
   Sn. It is always clear in these cases that there will be similar divisions
of [the corresponding] bad things.
   So. They say that what is worth choosing and what is worth taking
are different. For what stimulates an unconditional impulse is worth
choosing, <while what is worth taking is what we reasonably select>. In
so far as what is worth choosing differs from what is worth taking, to
the same degree what is in itself worth choosing differs from what is in
itself worth taking, and in general for what is good by comparison with
what has value.
   6. Since man is a rational, mortal animal, social by nature, they say
also that all human virtue and happiness constitute a life which is consis-
tent and in agreement with nature.
   6a. Zeno defined the goal thus: 'living in agreement'. This means
living according to a single and consonant rational principle, since those
who live in conflict are unhappy. Those who came after him made further
distinctions and expressed it thus: 'living in agreement with nature',
supposing that Zeno's formulation was an incomplete predicate. For
Cleanthes, who first inherited [the leadership of] his school, added 'with
nature' and defined it thus: 'the goal is living in agreement with nature'.
Chrysippus wanted to make this clearer and expressed it in this way: 'to
live according to experience of the things which happen by nature.' And
Diogenes: 'to be reasonable in the selection and rejection of natural
things'. And Archedemus: 'to live completing all the appropriate acts'.
And Antipater: 'to live invariably selecting natural things and rejecting
unnatural things'. He often defined it thus as well: 'invariably and un-
swervingly to do everything in one's power for the attainment of the
principal natural things'.
   6b. 'Goal' is used in three senses by the members of this school: for
the final good is said to be the goal in standard scholarly language, as
when they say that agreement is the goal; and they say that the target is
the goal, for example, they speak of the life in agreement by reference
to the associated predicate; in the third sense they say that the ultimate
object of striving is a goal, to which all others are referred.
212                                                                   l/-95

   6c. They think that the goal and the target are different. For the target
is the physical state [lit. body] set up [for people] to try to achieve ...
[lacuna] ... those who aim at happiness, since every virtuous man is
happy and every base man is, by contrast, unhappy.
   6d. And of good things, some are necessary for happiness and some
are not. And all the virtues and the activities which employ them are
necessary; joy and good spirits and the practices are not necessary. Simi-
larly, of bad things some are necessary, as being bad, for the existence
of unhappiness, and some are not necessary. All the vices and the activities
based on them are necessary; all the passions and ailments and things
like this are not necessary.
   6e. They say that being happy is the goal for the sake of which
everything is done and that it is itself done for the sake of nothing else;
and this consists in living according to virtue, in living in agreement,
and again (which is the same thing) in living according to nature. Zeno
defined happiness in this manner: 'happiness is a smooth flow of life'.
Cleanthes too used this definition in his treatises, and so did Chrysippus
and all their followers, saying that happiness was no different from the
happy life, although they do say that while happiness is set up as a
target, the goal is to achieve happiness, which is the same as being
happy.
   So it is clear from this that [these expressions] are equivalent: 'living
according to nature' and 'living honourably' and 'living well' and again
'the honourable and good' and 'virtue and what participates in virtue';
and that every good thing is honourable and similarly that every shameful
thing is bad. That is also why the Stoic goal is equivalent to the life
according to virtue.
   6f. They say that what is worth choosing differs from what is to be
chosen. For every good is worth choosing, but every advantage is to be
chosen, and [advantage] is understood with reference to having the good.
That is why we choose what is to be chosen, for example being prudent,
which is understood with reference to having prudence; but we do not
choose what is worth choosing, but if anything, we choose to have it.
   Similarly too all goods are worth enduring [for] and worth standing
firmly by, and analogously in the case of the other virtues, even if there
is no name for them. And all advantages are to be endured [for] and to
be stood firmly by. And in the same manner for the others which are in
accordance with the vices.
   7. After giving a sufficient account of good things and bad things and
what is worth choosing and what is worth avoiding and the goal and
happiness, we think it necessary to go through in their proper order what
is said about things indifferent. They say that things indifferent are
Ethics                                                                    213

between good things and bad things, saying that the indifferent is con-
ceived of in two ways: in one way it is what is neither good nor bad nor
worth choosing nor worth avoiding; in the other it is what is stimulative
of impulse neither towards nor away from [itself]. In this sense some are
said to be absolutely indifferent, such as <having an odd or even number
of hairs on one's head, or> extending one's finger this way or that way,
or to picking off some annoying object, such as a twig or a leaf. In the
first sense one must say that, according to the members of this school,
what is between virtue and vice is indifferent, but not [indifferent] with
respect to selection and rejection; and that is why some have selective
value, and some have rejective disvalue, but make no contribution at all
to the happy life.
   7a. And some are natural, some unnatural and some neither unnatural
nor natural. Natural, then, are such things: health, strength, soundness
of one's sense organs, and things like this. Unnatural are such things:
disease, weakness, impairment and such things. Neither unnatural nor
natural are: a stable condition of soul and body according to which the
one is receptive of false presentations and the other receptive of wounds
and impairments; and things like these. They say that the account of
these matters is based on the primary natural and unnatural things. For
what makes a difference and the indifferent are relative. That is why,
they say, even if we say that bodily matters and external things are
indifferent, we [also] say that they are indifferent with respect to living
a beautifully ordered life (and in this consists a happy life), but not, by
Zeus, [indifferent] with respect to being in a natural state nor with respect
to impulse towards or away from [something].
   7b. Again, of indifferent things, some have more value and others
have less; and some are [valuable] in themselves and some instrumentally;
and some are preferred and some are rejected, and some neither. Preferred
are all things indifferent which have a lot of value as indifferents; rejected
are all things indifferent which have a lot of disvalue, in the same sense;
neither preferred nor indifferent are all which have neither a lot of value
nor a lot of disvalue.
   Of preferred things, some are in the soul, some in the body, and some
external. In the soul are things like this: natural ability, [moral] progress,
good memory, mental sharpness, a condition which enables one to stand
firm in appropriate actions, and the crafts which can contribute substan-
tially to the natural life. Preferred things in the body are health, good
sense-perception, and things like these. Among externals are parents,
children, possessions in due measure, acceptance among men.
   The opposites of those mentioned are rejected things in the soul;
[rejected things] in the body and externally are those which are similarly
214                                                                   l/-95

opposed to the above-mentioned preferred things in the body and exter-
nally.
   Neither preferred nor rejected in the soul are presentation, assent and
things like that; in the body: fair or dark complexion, having blue eyes
and all pleasure and pain and anything else of this sort; in external things
what is neither preferred <nor rejected> are things like this: whatever,
being cheap and bringing nothing useful, provides by itself an utterly
tiny amount of usefulness.
   Since the soul is more important than the body, they also say that the
things of the soul which are natural and preferred have more value for
the natural life than bodily and external things; for example, natural
ability in the soul is more helpful for virtue than natural ability in the
body, and similarly for the others.
   7c. Again, of things indifferent, they say that some are stimulative of
impulse towards [themselves], some stimulative of impulse away from
[themselves], and some stimulative of impulse neither towards nor away
from [themselves]. Those things which we said are natural are stimulative
of impulse towards [themselves]; those which are unnatural are stimula-
tive of impulse away from [themselves]; those which are neither are
stimulative of impulse neither towards nor away from [themselves]; for
example, having an odd or even number of hairs.
   7d. Of things which are indifferent and natural, some are primary
natural things, some natural by participation. Primary natural things are
a motion or state which occurs in accordance with the spermatic princi-
ples, such as <soundness and> health and sense-perception (I mean an
act of grasping) and strength. By participation: everything which partici-
pates in a motion or state which is in accordance with the spermatic
principles, for example, a sound hand and a healthy body and senses
which are not impaired. Similarly, for the unnatural things [the situation
is] analogous.
   7e. Everything which is natural is worth taking and everything which
is <un>natural is worth not taking. Of natural things, some are worth
taking in themselves, some because of other things. In themselves: every-
thing which is stimulative of impulse in such a manner as to encourage
[someone] to pursue it or to hang on to it, such as health, good sense
perception, freedom from pain, bodily beauty. Instrumentally: everything
which is stimulative of impulse by reference to other things and not in
such a manner as to encourage [someone to pursue] it, such as wealth,
reputation, and things like these. Similarly, of unnatural things some are
in themselves not worth taking and some because they are instrumental
to things which are in themselves not worth taking.
   7f. Everything which is natural has value and everything which is
Ethics                                                                    215

unnatural has disvalue. Value has three senses: [I] the estimation and
honour [for something] in itself, and [2] the exchange-value of its ap-
praised worth; and [3] third what Anti pater calls selective value, according
to which when circumstances permit we choose these things rather than
those, for example, health rather than disease and life rather than death
and wealth rather than poverty. Analogously, they also say that disvalue
has three senses, if one inverts the senses [of the definitions] given for
the three kinds of value.
    Diogenes says that the 'estimation' is a judgement of the extent to
which something is natural or provides something useful to nature. 'Ap-
praised worth' is not interpreted in the sense in which the things [them-
selves] are said to have 'appraised worth', but as we say that he who puts
an appraisal on things is the 'appraiser'. For he says that such a man is
the 'appraiser' of exchange-value. And these are the two [senses of] value
according to which we say that something is preferred in value, and he
says that the third is that according to which we say that something has
valuable merit and value, which does not apply to things indifferent but
only to virtuous things. He says that we sometimes use the word 'value'
in place of 'what is fitting', as it was used in the definition of justice
when it is said to be a condition which distributes to each person what
is accordance with his value; for this is like saying 'what is fitting' for
each person.
    7g. Of things which have value, some have a lot of value, some have
little. Similarly, of things which have disvalue, some have a lot of disvalue,
some have little. Those which have a lot of value are called preferred
things, while those which have a lot of disvalue are called rejected, Zeno
being the first one to apply these terms to the things. They say that the
preferred is that which, being indifferent, we select in accordance with
the principal reason. The same kind of account applies to what is rejected,
and the examples are the same by analogy. None of the good things is
preferred, since they have the greatest value. The preferred, which holds
the second rank and has value, is in a way close to the nature of good
things. For at a court the king is not among those who are preferred,
but those below him in rank are. They are called preferred, not because
they contribute to happiness and help to produce it, but because it is
necessary to select them in preference to the rejected things.
    8. The topic of appropriate action follows [naturally] on the discussion
of the preferred things. Appropriate action is defined [thus]: 'what is
consistent in life, which when done admits of a reasonable defence'. What
is contrary to the appropriate is the opposite. This extends even to
irrational animals, for they too do thing[s] consistently with their nature.
In rational animals it is expressed thus: 'what is consistent in a life'. And
216                                                                  l/-95

of appropriate actions, some are complete [or perfect], and they are
called [morally] perfect actions. [Morally] perfect actions are activities
in accordance with virtue, such as being prudent and acting justly. Things
which are not of this character are not [morally] perfect actions, and they
do not call them complete appropriate actions either, but intermediate
ones, such as getting married, going on an embassy, engaging in dialectic,
and similar things.
   Sa. Of [morally] perfect actions some are requirements and some not.
Requirements are advantages, expressed in predicate form, such as being
prudent and being temperate. Things which are not of this character are
not requirements. The same technical distinctions apply similarly to
inappropriate actions.
   Every inappropriate action which occurs in a rational <animal> is a
[moral] mistake; and an appropriate action when perfected [or completed]
is a [morally] perfect action. The intermediate appropriate action is
measured by [reference to] certain indifferent things, which are selected
according to or contrary to nature, and which bring prosperity of such
a sort that if we were not to take them or were to reject them, except
under abnormal circumstances, we would not be happy.
   9. They say that what stimulates impulse is nothing but a hormetic
presentation of what is obviously [or: immediately] appropriate. And
impulse is, in general, a movement of the soul towards something. The
impulse occurring in rational animals and that in irrational animals are
understood to be its forms. But they have not been named. For striving
is not rational impulse but a form of rational impulse. And one would
properly define rational impulse by saying that it is a movement of
intellect towards something which is involved in action. Opposed to this
is an impulse away from [something], a movement <of intellect away from
something involved in action.> They say in a special sense too that
planning is impulse, being a form of practical impulse. And planning is
a movement of intellect to something in the future.
   So, thus far impulse is used in four senses, and impulse away from
in two. When you add the hormetic condition too, which indeed they
also call impulse in a special sense, and which is the source of the active
impulse, then 'impulse' is [seen to be] used in five senses.
   9a. There are several forms of practical impulse, among which are
these: purpose, effort, preparation, endeavour, <choice,> forechoice, wish,
wanting. So they say that purpose is an indication of accomplishment;
effort is an impulse before an impulse; preparation is an action before
an action; endeavour is an impulse in the case of something already in
hand; choice is wish based on analogy; forechoice is a choice before a
choice; wish is a rational striving; wanting is a voluntary wish.
Ethics                                                                                  217

   9b. All impulses are [acts of] assent; <there are other kinds of
assent>, 45 but the practical ones also include the power to set [the agent]
in motion. Now, [acts of] assent are directed at one thing and impulses
at another; and [acts of] assent are directed at certain propositions, while
impulses are directed at predicates which are, in a way, included in the
propositions to which assent is given.
   Since passion is a form of impulse, let us speak next about the passions.
   10. They say that a passion is an impulse which is excessive and
disobedient to the reason which constrains, or an <irrational>, unnatural
motion of the soul (and all passions belong to the leading part of the
soul). And that is why every 'flutter' is a passion <and> again <every>
passion is a 'flutter'. Since this is what a passion is like, one must suppose
that some are primary and principal, and the others are referred to these.
The primary are these four kinds: desire, fear, pain, and pleasure. Desire
and fear, then, are principal, one [being concerned with] the apparent
good, the other with the apparent bad. Pleasure and pain supervene on
these, pleasure when we achieve what we desired or escape what we were
afraid of; pain when we miss achieving what we desired or meet with
what we were afraid of. With all the passions of the soul, since they say
that they are opinions, the [word] opinion is used instead of 'weak
supposition', and 'fresh' is used instead of 'what stimulates irrational
contraction <or> elation'.
   lOa. The terms 'irrational' and 'unnatural' are not used in their com-
mon senses, but 'irrational' means the same as 'disobedient to reason'.
For every passion is violent, since those who are in a state of passion
often see that it is advantageous not to do this, but are swept away by
the vehemence [of the passion], as though by some disobedient horse,
and are drawn to doing it; in this connection people often concede [that
this is going on] when they cite that familiar tag: 46 "Nature compels me,
though I am aware [of what I am doing]". For he here calls the realization
and consciousness of what is right "awareness". And the term 'unnatural'
was used in the outline [definition] of passion, since it is something which
happens contrary to the right and natural reason. Everyone in a state of
passion turns his back on reason, not like those who are deceived on
some point or other, but in a special sense. For those who are deceived,
about atoms being principles for instance, when they are taught that they
do not exist, then abandon their belief. But those who are in a state of
passion, even if they do learn and are taught that one should not suffer

45. For the suggested supplement see B. Inwood, Ethics and Action in EarlJ' Stoicism (Oxford
1985) pp. 287-288 n. 271.
46. Euripides fr. 837 Nauck.
218                                                                      l/-95

pain or fear or generally experience any of the passions of the soul, still
do not abandon them but are drawn by the passions into being dominated
by their tyrannical rule.
    lOb. They say, then, that desire is a striving which is disobedient to
reason; its cause is believing that a good is approaching, and that when
it is here we shall do well by it; this opinion itself <that it really is worth
striving for> has a <fresh> [power] to stimulate irregular motion. Fear is
an avoidance disobedient to reason, and its cause is believing that a bad
thing is approaching; this opinion that it really is worth avoiding has a
'fresh' [power] to stimulate motion. Pain is a contraction of the soul
disobedient to reason, and its cause is believing that a 'fresh' bad thing
is present, for which it is appropriate to <suffer contraction [in the soul].
Pleasure is an elation of the soul disobedient to reason, and its cause is
believing that a fresh good thing is present, for which it is appropriate
to> suffer elation [in the soul].
    Under desire are subsumed such [passions] as these: anger and its
forms (spiritedness and irascibility and wrath and rancour and bitterness
and such things), vehement sexual desire and longing and yearning and
love of pleasure and love of wealth and love of reputation and similar
things. Under pleasure are mean-spirited satisfaction, contentment,
charms, and similar things. Under fear are hesitation, agony, shock,
shame, panic, superstition, fright, and dread. Under pain are envy, grudg-
ing, resentment, pity, grief, heavy-heartedness, distress, sorrow, anguish,
and vexation.
    lOc. Anger, then, is a desire to take revenge on someone who appears
to have wronged [you] contrary to what is appropriate; spiritedness is
anger just beginning; irascibility is swollen anger; wrath is anger laid by
or saved up for a long time; rancour is anger which watches for an
opportunity for vengeance; bitterness is anger which breaks out immedi-
ately; sexual desire is an effort to gain love resulting from the appearance
of [physical] beauty; longing is a sexual love for someone who is absent;
yearning is a desire for contact with a friend who is absent; love of
pleasure is a desire for pleasures; love of wealth [is a desire] for wealth;
love of reputation for reputation.
    Mean-spirited satisfaction is pleasure at someone else's misfortunes;
contentment is pleasure at what is unexpected; charm is deceptive pleasure
which comes via vision.
    Hesitation is a fear of future action; agony is a fear of failure or,
otherwise, a fear of defeat; shock is a fear arising from a presentation of
something unfamiliar; shame is a fear of bad reputation; panic is fear
which hastens with the voice; superstition is a fear of gods and daimons;
Ethics                                                                  219

fright is a fear of something dreadful; dread is a fear which produces
fright. 47
   Grudging is a pain at the goods of other people; envy is a pain at the
other fellow getting what one desires oneself, and not getting it oneself;
there is another sense of 'envy' [zeal], i.e., the congratulation of someone
who is [there is a corrupt word here] or the imitation of someone thought
of as better [than oneself]; resentment is a pain at the other fellow also
getting what one desired oneself; pity is a pain at someone's seeming to
suffer undeservedly; grief is a pain at an untimely death; heavy-hearted-
ness is a pain which weighs one down; distress is a pain which makes
one unable to speak; sorrow is a pain which comes by brooding [on
something]; anguish is a pain which penetrates and settles in; vexation
is a pain accompanied by tossing about.
   lOd. Of these passions, some indicate the object they are concerned
with, such as pity, grudging, mean-spirited satisfaction, shame; some
indicate the peculiar qualities of the motion, such as anguish and dread.
   lOe. A predisposition is a tendency towards [having a] passion, such
as one of the activities contrary to nature; for example, proneness to pain,
proneness to grudging, proneness to irascibility, and similar things. There
are also predispositions to other activities which are contrary to nature,
such as to theft and adultery and arrogant behaviour; it is in virtue of
these that people are said to become thieves, adulterers and arrogant
men. A disease is an opinion connected to a desire which has settled and
hardened into a condition, in virtue of which people think that things
not worth choosing are extremely worth choosing; for example, love of
women, love of wine, love of money; there are also certain states opposite
to <these> diseases which turn up as antipathies, such as hatred of women,
hatred of wine, hatred of mankind. Those diseases which occur in con-
junction with weakness are called ailments.
   lla. They say that a [morally] perfect action is an appropriate action
which covers all the features, 48 or as we said before, a complete [perfect]
appropriate action. What is done contrary to right reason is a [moral]
mistake; or, an [action] in which something appropriate has been omitted
by a rational animal [is a moral mistake].
   lib. They say that all good things belong <in common> to the virtuous,
in that he who benefits one of his neighbours also benefits himself.
Concord is a knowledge of common goods, and that is why all virtuous
men are in concord with each other, because they are in agreement about

47. Restored from D.L. 7.112.
48. Literally "numbers".
220                                                                     l/-95

matters concerned with life. The base are enemies and do harm to each
other and are hostile, because they are in discord with each other.
   They say that justice exists by nature and not by convention. Conse-
quent on this is [the belief] that the wise man participates in political
life, especially in the sort of governments which show some [moral]
progress towards becoming perfect governments. Again, it is congenial
to the virtuous to legislate and to educate men and again to compose
[books] which can help those who encounter their writings; and so are
condescending to marry and have children, both for his own sake and
for that of his fatherland; and he will endure both pain and death for
the sake of [his fatherland], if it is moderate. Juxtaposed to these traits
are base ones, courting the people and practicing sophistry and composing
books which are harmful to those who read them. These are traits which
would not occur in virtuous men.
    llc. There are three senses of friendship. In one sense it is for the
sake of common benefit that people are said to be friends; this kind of
friendship is not that of good men, because for them there is no good
which is composed out of separate components. They say that friendship
in the second sense, a friendly attitude from one's neighbours, is one of
the external goods. They claim that a personal friendship, according to
which one is a friend of one's neighbours, is one of the goods in the soul.
    lld. There is another sense in which all good things are common.
For they believe that anyone who benefits anyone, by that very fact,
receives equal benefit, but that no base man either benefits or is benefitted.
For benefitting is <to change> or maintain something in accordance with
virtue and being benefitted is to be changed in accordance with virtue.
   They say that only the virtuous man is a household economist and a
good household economist, and again a money-maker. For household
economy is a condition which contemplates and practices what is advanta-
geous to a household; and economy is an arranging of expenditures and
tasks and a care for possessions and for the work that is done on the
farm. And money-making is experience of acquiring money by means of
the actions by which one should do so, and a condition which causes
one to behave 'in agreement' in the collection and preservation and
expenditure of money with the aim of [achieving] prosperity. And some
think that money-making is an intermediate [activity], others that it is
virtuous. And no base man is a good guardian of a household, nor can
he arrange it that a house is well run. And only the virtuous man is a
money-maker, since he knows the sources from which one is to get money
and when and how and up to what point [one should continue doing so].
   They say that <the sensible man> forgives <no one; for it is characteristic
of the same man to forgive> and to think that the man who has made a
Ethics                                                                  221

[moral] mistake did not do so because of himself, although [in fact]
everyone who makes a [moral] mistake does so because of his own vice.
And that is why it is quite proper for them to say that he does not even
forgive those who make [moral] mistakes. Nor, they say, is the good man
equitable, since the equitable man is prone to ask for a reduction of the
punishment which is due; and it is characteristic of the same man to be
equitable and to suppose that the punishments established by the law
for wrong-doers are too harsh, and to believe that the lawgiver established
punishments which are unduly [severe].
    They say that the law is virtuous, being right reason which commands
what is to be done and forbids what is not to be done. And since the
law is virtuous, the lawful man would be virtuous; for he is a man who
is lawful and follows the law and does what is commanded by it. He who
interprets the law is a man of the law; and none of the base is either
lawful or a man of the law.
    lie. Again, they say that some activities are [morally] perfect actions,
some are [moral] mistakes, and some are neither. [Morally] perfect actions
are such things: being prudent, being temperate, acting justly, feeling
joy, doing good works, being in good spirits, walking prudently, and
everything which is done in accordance with right reason. [Moral] mis-
takes are: being imprudent, being wanton, unjust action, feeling pain and
fear, stealing, and in general whatever is done contrary to right reason.
Such things as these are neither [morally] perfect actions nor [moral]
mistakes: speaking, asking, answering, walking, going out of town, and
similar things. All [morally] perfect actions are just actions and lawful
actions and orderly actions and good practices and acts of good fortune
and acts of a happy life and opportune actions and beautifully-ordered
actions. They are, however, not yet acts of prudence, but only those
which are performed on the basis of prudence and similarly for all the
other virtues-even if they do not have proper names, such as acts of
temperance which are performed on the basis of temperance and acts of
justice which are performed on the basis of justice. By contrast, [moral]
mistakes are unjust actions and unlawful actions and disorderly actions.
    llf. They say that just as there is a difference between what is worth
choosing and what is to be chosen, so there is a difference between what
is worth striving for and what is to be striven for and what is worth
wishing for and what is to be wished for and what is worth accepting
and what is to be accepted. For <good things> are worth choosing and
wishing for and striving for <and accepting; but advantages are to be
chosen and wished for and striven for> and accepted, since they are
predicates corresponding to the good things. For we choose what is to
be chosen and want what is to be wanted and strive for what is to be
222                                                                  l/-95

striven for. For acts of choice and striving and wishing are directed at
predicates, just as impulses are. But we choose and wish, and similarly
strive, to have good things, which is why good things are worth choosing
and wishing for and striving for. For we choose to have prudence and
temperance, but not, by Zeus!, being prudent and being temperate, since
these are incorporeals and predicates.
    Similarly, they say that all goods are worth abiding in and cleaving to
and analogously for the other virtues, even if they do not have proper
names. But all the advantages and similar things are to be abided in and
cleaved to. In the same way they suppose there is a difference between
things worth being cautious over and things which one is to be cautious
over and things which are not worth abiding in and things which are
not to be abided in; the same account applies to the other terms which
go with the vices.
    11 g. They say that every honourable and good man is complete [perfect]
because he lacks none of the virtues. The base man, by contrast, is
incomplete, since he participates in none of the virtues. That is why
good men are always and under all conditions happy, and the base
unhappy. And <their> happiness does not differ from divine happiness;
and Chrysippus says that momentary [happiness] does not differ from
the happiness of Zeus, <and> that the happiness of Zeus is in no respect
more worth choosing or more honourable or more majestic that that of
wtse men.
   Zeno and the Stoic philosophers who follow him believe that there
are two classes of men, the virtuous and the base. And men of the virtuous
class employ all the virtues throughout their entire life, while the base
[em ploy] the vices. Hence, the one group is always [morally] perfect in
everything they apply themselves to, but the other group [always] makes
[moral] mistakes. And the virtuous man always uses his experience of
life in what he does, and so does everything well, insofar [as he acts]
prudently and temperately and in accordance with the other virtues. And
the base man by contrast [does everything] badly. And the virtuous man
is big and powerful and lofty and strong. Big, because he is able to
achieve his purposes and aims; powerful, because he is well developed
in all respects; lofty, because he participates in the height fitting for a
man who is noble and wise; and strong, because he has acquired the
fitting strength, being invincible and unbeatable in contests. Accordingly,
he is not compelled by anyone nor does he compel anyone; he neither
hinders nor is hindered; he is forced by no one and forces no one; he
neither dominates nor is dominated; neither harms nor is himself harmed;
neither meets with misfortune <nor makes others do so>; is neither deluded
Ethics                                                                                 223

nor deceives another; is neither deceived nor ignorant nor unaware of
himself nor, in general, believes anything which is false. He is happy
most of all, and fortunate and blessed and prosperous and pious and
god-loving and worthy, like a king and a general, a politician and a
household economist and a money-maker. And the base are the opposite
of all of these.
   In general, the virtuous have all good things and the base have all bad
things. One must not suppose that they mean it in this sense: that if
there exist good things, they belong to the virtuous, and similarly for
the base; but rather [they mean that] they have so many good things that
they are in no way lacking with respect to having a perfect [complete]
<and happy> life, and the others have so many bad things that their life
is incomplete [imperfect] and unhappy.
   llh. They call virtue by many names. 49 For they say that it is something
good, because it draws us to the correct life. And pleasing, because it is
approved of without suspicion; and worth a lot, <because> its value is
unsurpassable; and virtuous, for it is worth much virtuous effort; and
worthy of praise, for one would be reasonable in praising it; and honour-
able, because by nature it summons to itself those who strive for it; and
advantageous, for it brings the sort of things which contribute to living
well; and useful because it is advantageous when used; and worth choos-
ing, for its characteristic results are those things which one would reason-
ably choose; and necessary, because when it is present it benefits and
when it is absent it is not possible to be benefitted; and profitable, for
the advantages which come from it are greater than the effort which
produces them; and self-sufficient, for it suffices for the man who pos-
sesses it; and not lacking, because it removes one from all lack; and it
suffices, because when used it is sufficient and applies to every kind of
use relevant to one's life.
   lli. The base participate in none of the good things, since the good
is virtue or what participates in virtue; and the requirements which
correspond to the good things, being benefits, occur only in the virtuous;
just as the non-requirements corresponding to the bad things [occur]
only in the base; for they are forms of harm, and for this reason all good
men are free of harm in both senses, unable to either do harm or to
suffer it; and conversely for the base.
   They say that true wealth is a good thing and that true poverty is a
bad thing; and that true freedom is a good thing and true slavery a bad

49. Most of these appellations and their explanations exploit fanciful and inimitable etymo-
logical connections.
224                                                                   l/-95

thing. That is why the virtuous man is also the only wealthy and free
man, and the base man, conversely, is a pauper (since he is deficient in the
requirements for wealth) and a slave (because of his suspect disposition).
   All good things are common to the virtuous, and bad things to the
base. That is why he who benefits someone else is also benefitted himself,
and he who harms someone also harms himself. All virtuous men benefit
each other, even though they are not in all cases friends of each other
or well disposed [to each other] or in good repute [with each other] or
receptive [of each other], because they do not have a [cognitive] grasp
of each other and do not live in the same place. They, however, are
disposed to be well disposed and to be friendly to each other and to hold
[each other] in good repute and to be receptive [of each other]. The
imprudent are in a condition opposite to this.
   Since the law, as we said, is virtuous (because it is right reason which
commands what is to be done and forbids what is not be done), they say
that only the wise man is lawful, since he does what is commanded by
the law and is the only interpreter of it, and that is why he is a man of
the law. And silly men are in the opposite condition.
   Again, they also assign to the virtuous the supervisory function of a
ruler and its forms: kingship, generalship, naval command, and forms of
rule like these. Accordingly, only the virtuous man rules, and even if he
does not in all circumstances do so in actuality, still in all circumstances
he does so by disposition. And only the virtuous man is obedient, since
he is prone to follow a ruler. But none of the imprudent is like this; for
the imprudent man is not able either to rule or to be ruled, since he is
stubborn and intractable.
   The sensible man does everything well, since he continuously makes
use of his experience of life in a prudent and self-controlled and orderly
and organized fashion. But the base man, since he has no experience of
the right use [of things] does everything badly, acting in accordance with
the disposition he has, being prone to change [his mind] and seized by
regret about each thing [he does]. And regret is [a feeling of] pain [one
has] about actions which have been performed, because [of the belief
that] they were [moral] mistakes made by oneself; and this is a passion
of the soul which produces unhappiness and internal strife. For in so far
as the regretful man loathes what has happened, to that extent he is
angry at himself for having been responsible for these events. And this
is why the base man is dishonoured, since he is neither worthy of honour
nor honoured. For honour is worthiness of reward and reward is the
prize for virtue which does good for others. Thus what does not participate
in virtue would justly be called dishonoured.
   They say that every base man is an exile, in so far as he is deprived
Ethics                                                                    225

of law and a naturally fitting government. For the law is, as we said,
virtuous and so too is the [corresponding] state. And it was enough that
Cleanthes posed this sort of argument about the [claim that] the state
[polis] is virtuous: If the state is a contrivance for dwelling in which one
takes refuge in order to give and receive justice, is not the state a virtuous
thing? But the state is such a dwelling place. Therefore, the state is a
virtuous thing. And 'state' is used in three senses: as a dwelling place,
as a complex system of men, and third as the combination of these two
senses. In two of these senses the state is said to be virtuous: as a complex
system of men and in the combination [of the two senses], because <of
the> [implicit] reference to its inhabitants.
   Ilk. They say that every base man is a boor; for boorishness is inexperi-
ence of the habits and laws of the state, and every base man is subject
to this. And he is also wild, since he is a man hostile to the lawful way
oflife, beastlike, and harmful. This same fellow is untamed and tyrannical,
having a disposition to perform despotic actions, as well as ferocious and
violent and illegal actions, when he gets the chance. He is also ungrateful,
not finding it congenial either to return or to offer gratitude since he does
nothing for the common good or for friendship or without calculation.
   Nor is the base man a lover of learning [philologos] or of listening,
because in the first place he is not prepared for the reception of right
accounts [or arguments: logot] because of the imprudence which derives
from his corruption, and because no base man has been encouraged [to
turn] to virtue nor does he encourage [others to turn] to virtue; for he
who has been encouraged [to turn] to virtue or who is encouraging others
[to turn] to virtue must be prepared for philosophizing, and he who is
prepared for it faces no impediments; but none of the base is like that.
For it is not the man who listens eagerly and memorizes what philosophers
say who is prepared for philosophizing, but the man who is prepared to
carry into action what is pronounced in philosophy and to live by it. But
none of the base is like that, since they are already in the grip of the
opinions of vice. For if any of the base had been encouraged to [turn to
virtue], he would also have turned away from vice. And no one who
possesses vice has turned to virtue; just as no one who is sick has turned
to health. Only the wise man has been encouraged to [turn to virtue],
and only he is able to encourage [others to turn to virtue], and none of
the imprudent-for none of the imprudent lives by the precepts <of
virtue>. Nor is he a lover of learning [philologos], but rather a lover of
talk [logophilos], since he only proceeds as far as a superficial [sort of]
chatter and does not yet confirm the talk [logos] about virtue by means
of deeds.
   Nor is any of the base a lover of toil; for love of toil is a disposition
226                                                                              l/-95

which produces what is fitting by means of toil in a manner which is
unapprehensive; but none of the base is unapprehensive with regard
to toil.
   Nor does any of the base make the estimation of virtue which is in
accordance with its value; for the estimation is a virtuous thing, since it is
knowledge in accordance with which we think we are acquiring something
worth considering. But none of the virtuous things belongs to the base,
so that none of the base makes the proper estimation of virtue. For if
any of the imprudent made the estimation which is in accordance with
the value of virtue, then in so far as they honoured this, they would
regulate vice out [of their lives]. But every imprudent man is pleasantly
inured to his own vice. For one should not consider their external [i.e.,
verbalized] discourse, which is base, 5ยฐ but rather the discourse of their
actions. For by their actions it is proven that they are not committed to
honourable and virtuous actions, but rather to slavish and unmeasured
pleasures.
   They hold that every [moral] mistake is an act of impiety; for to do
anything contrary to the wish of god is a sign of impiety. For since the
gods find virtue and its works congenial and find vice and its products
uncongenial, and since a [moral] mistake is an action in accordance with
vice, obviously every [moral] mistake turned out to be displeasing to the
gods-and that [sort of thing] is an act of impiety; for in every [moral]
mistake the base man does something displeasing to the gods.
   Again, since every base man does all that he does in accordance with
vice, just as the virtuous man [does all that he does] in accordance with
virtue, [it is] also [true that] he who has one vice has all. And among
these [vices] one sees impiety, not the impiety which is classified as an
activity, but the condition opposite to piety. And what is done in accor-
dance with impiety is an act of impiety; <therefore>, every [moral] mistake
is an act of impiety.
   Again, they also hold that every imprudent man is an enemy to the
gods. For hostility is a lack of consonance and lack of concord <concerning>
the [practical] concerns of life, just as friendship is consonance and
concord. But the base disagree with the gods about the [practical] concerns
of life; and that is why every imprudent man is an enemy to the gods.
Again, if every one believes that those who are opposed to them are
enemies, and if the base man is opposed to the virtuous, and if god is
virtuous, then the base man is an enemy to the gods.

50. This word is probably corrupt; perhaps the text should say 'deceptive' or something
similar.
Ethics                                                                    227

   111. They say that all [moral] mistakes are equal, but not, however/ 1
similar. For by nature they all derive from vice as from a single source,
since in all [moral] mistakes the decision is the same; but [moral] mistakes
do differ in quality with regard to the external cause, since there are
differences among the intermediate things which are the subject of the de-
ctstons.
   You could get a clear image of the point being demonstrated by
attending to the following: every falsehood is equally a falsehood; for one
is no more in error than another; for the statement "it is <always> night"
is a falsehood, just as is the statement "a centaur lives"; and it is no more
possible to say that the one is a falsehood than to say that the other is;
but the falseness in each is not equally false, and those who are in error
are not equally in error. And it is not possible to be making a [moral]
mistake to a greater or lesser degree, since every [moral] mistake is
performed in virtue of being in error. Moreover, it is not the case that
a [morally] correct action does not admit of being greater or lesser while
a [moral] mistake does admit of being greater or lesser; for they [i.e.,
moral mistakes and morally correct actions] are all complete and that is
why they could not be deficient or excessive with respect to each other.
Therefore, all [moral] mistakes are equal.
   11m. As to natural ability and noble birth, some members of this school
were led to say that every wise man is endowed with these attributes; but
others were not. For some think that men are not only endowed with a
natural ability for virtue by nature, but also that some are such by training,
and they accepted this proverbial saying: 52 "practice, when aged by time,
turns into nature." And they made the same supposition about noble
birth, so that natural ability is a condition congenial to virtue which
comes from nature or training, or a condition by which certain men are
prone to acquire virtue readily. And noble birth is a condition congenial
to virtue which comes from birth or training.
   Since the virtuous man is affable in conversation and charming and
encouraging and prone to pursue good will and friendship through his
conversation, he fits in as well as possible with the majority of men; and
that is why he is lovable and graceful and persuasive, and again flattering
and shrewd and opportune and quick-witted and easy-going and unfussy
and straightforward and unfeigned. And the base man is subject to all
the opposite traits. And they say that being ironic is a trait of base men
and that no free and virtuous man is ironic. Similarly for sarcasm, which

51. Literally, "not yet" or "no longer".
52. From an unknown tragedy, 227 Nauck.
228                                                                     l/-95

is irony combined with a kind of mockery. They say that friendship only
exists among the wise, since it is only among them that there is concord
about the [practical] matters of life; and concord is a knowledge of
common goods. For it is impossible for there to be genuine friendship
(as opposed to falsely named friendship) without trust and reliability;
but since the base are untrustworthy and unreliable and have hostile
opinions there is no friendship among them, although there are certain
other kinds of association and bonding which are held together from the
outside by necessity and opinions. And they say that cherishing and
welcoming and love belong to the virtuous alone.
   And only the wise man is a king and regal, but none of the base is.
For regal rule is not subject to review and is supreme and is superior to
all [other forms of rule].
   And they say that the virtuous man is the best doctor of himself; for
he is a careful observer of his own nature and is knowledgeable about
the factors which contribute to health.
   The sensible man cannot get drunk; for drunkenness includes an
element of[moral] error, for there is babbling over drink; but the virtuous
man makes a [moral] mistake in no situation, which is why he does
everything in accordance with virtue and right reason which depends on it.
   There are three principal ways of life [for a wise man], the regal, the
political and third, the life devoted to knowledge. Similarly, there are
three principal ways to make money: by kingship, in which one is either
a king oneself or commands the resources of a monarch; second, by
political life, for, in accordance with the principal reason, he will partici-
pate in political life; for indeed he will also marry and have children,
<since> these things follow on the <nature> of the rational and social and
philanthropic animal. So he will make money both from politics and
from his friends, [at least] those who are in elevated positions. On the
topic of being a sophist 53 and doing well financially from sophistry, the
members of this school disagreed over the meaning. For they agreed that
[the wise man] would make money from his students and sometimes
receive fees from those who wanted to learn; but there arose among
them a debate about the meaning; some said that this very practice was
sophistry, [i.e.,] sharing the doctrines of philosophy in return for a fee;
others surmised that there was something base about the term 'sophistry',
as though it meant setting up a retail market in arguments, and so they
said that one not ought to make money from the education of whoever
came along [to study], that this manner of making money was beneath
the dignity of philosophy.

53. A professional intellectual.
Ethics                                                                                229
    They say that sometimes suicide is appropriate for virtuous men, in
many ways; but that for base men, [it is appropriate] to remain alive
even for those who would never be wise; for in [their mode of] living
they neither possess virtue nor expel vice. 54 And [the value of] life and
death is measured by [a reckoning of] appropriate and inappropriate ac-
tions.
    They say that the wise man is free of arrogance; for he neither suffers
arrogant behaviour nor inflicts it, since arrogance is a shameful act of
injustice and harm. And the virtuous man does not suffer injustice or
harm (although [it is true that] some people behave unjustly and arro-
gantly towards him), and in this he acts justly. In addition, arrogance is
no ordinary form of injustice, but one which is shameful and arrogant.
And the sensible man is immune from these things and is never shamed.
For he has the good and divine virtue within himself, which is why he
escapes all vice and harm.
    And the sensible man will sometimes be a king and live with a king
if he shows natural ability and a love of learning. We said 55 that it is
possible for him to participate in political life in accordance with the
principal reason, but that he will not do so if there is a <hindrance> and
especially if it is going to provide no benefit to his fatherland and he
supposes that great and difficult risks will follow from political activity.
    They say that the wise man does not lie, but is truthful in all [circum-
stances]; for lying does not consist in saying something false, but in
saying something false in order to make someone be in error and with
intent to mislead one's neighbours. They believe, however, that he will
sometimes employ falsehood in several ways without assenting [to it];
for [he will do so] when a general, against his adversaries, and in the
provision of what is advantageous and in many other aspects of managing
life. They say that wise man will never believe a falsehood, nor indeed
will he assent at all to anything which is not graspable, because he neither
holds [mere] opinions nor is ignorant in any respect. For ignorance is a
changeable and weak assent. Nor does he hold any belief weakly, but
rather securely and stably, and that is why the wise man holds no [mere]
opinion. For there are two [kinds of] opinion: one is assent to something
which is not graspable; the other is weak belief. And these are alien to
the disposition of the wise man, and that is why hastiness and assenting


54. The base should refrain from suicide since it is in general appropriate for all animals
to maintain their own lives, and the base (who are not wise) could not know when suicide
would be appropriate for them. The wise, however, could recogoize the exceptional circum-
stances which justify suicide.
55. lib. above.
230                                                                                   l/-95

before he has a grasp are traits of the hasty and base man, and are not
attributes of the man of natural ability who is perfect [complete] and
virtuous. Nor does anything escape his notice, for to fail to notice is to
have a belief which asserts a false thing. 56
   Following on these traits, he is not distrustful, for distrust is a belief
in a falsehood; and trust is a virtuous thing, for it is a strong grasp
which secures what is believed. Similarly, knowledge is unchangeable by
argument; and that is why they say that the base man neither knows nor
trusts in anything. Consequently, the wise man is not greedy nor does he
cheat or deliberately miscount (nor does anyone cheat him by miscounting
either); for all of these involve deception and commitment to falsehoods
about the topic in question. And none of the virtuous men makes a
mistake about about the road or his house or his target. But they believe
that the wise man neither mis-sees nor mis-hears nor, generally, makes
a mistake when using any of his sense-organs; for they believe that each
of these depends on false assent. Nor does the wise man make conjectural
interpretations, for a conjectural interpretation is in the class of assent
to something which is not grasped. Nor do they suppose that the sensible
man changes his mind, for changing one's mind depends on false assent,
<as though> one had previously made a mistake. Nor does he change in
any respect or shift his position or err. For all of these are characteristic
of those who change their doctrines, and that is alien to the sensible man.
Nor, they say, does he have any opinions similar to those discussed.
   11n. They believe that a wise man does not at first notice that he is
becoming one, nor does he strive for anything or believe that he wishes
any of the special objects of wishing; [this is] because he does not judge
that he has the requirements. Such distinctions also apply in the case of
the other crafts, and not just to prudence.
   llo. Since all [moral] mistakes and [morally] perfect actions are equal,
all imprudent men are also equally imprudent, since they possess a
disposition which is equal and identical. Although all [moral] mistakes
are equal, there are some differences among them, in so far as some come
from a hardened disposition which is difficult to cure and some do not.
   11 p. And some virtuous men are better than others at encouraging
[people to virtue] and persuading them; again, some are more quick-
witted than others, the increases being a result of the inclusion of interme-
diate steps.
   llq. Only the virtuous man has good children, though not all have
virtuous children since it is necessary for him who has good children to

56. A difficult sentence. Alternatively, one might emend apophantike to apophatike and
translate: for failure to notice is a belief in a falsehood which [implicitly] denies a fact.
Ethics                                                                231

use them as such. Only the virtuous man has a good old age and a good
death; for a good old age is conducting oneself virtuously at a certain
age, and a good death is to make one's end virtuously with a certain kind
of death.
   llr. And things are called healthy and unhealthy relative to man, [as
are] what serves as nutriment and what is laxative or astringent, and
things like these. For things which are naturally inclined to produce or
preserve health are healthy; unhealthy are those which are in the opposite
condition. A similar account applies to the others.
   lls. And only the virtuous man is a prophet since he has a knowledge
which distinguishes the signs relevant to human life which come from
the gods and daimons. And that is why he also has the forms of the
prophetic art, i.e., dream-reading and bird-interpretation and sacrificial
prophecy and any other types like these.
   And the virtuous man is said to be austere in so far as he neither uses
on another nor admits for himself discourse directed at winning gratitude.
And they say that the wise man will live a Cynic life, this <being> equal
to remaining in one's Cynicism [after becoming wise]; however, once
one becomes wise one will not begin to practice Cynicism.
   They say that sexual love is an effort to produce friendship resulting
from the appearance of [physical] beauty of young men in their prime;
and that is why the wise man makes sexual advances and will have sexual
intercourse with those who are worthy of [true] sexual love, [i.e.,] those
who are well-born and endowed with natural ability.
   They say that nothing happens to the wise man which is contrary to
his striving and impulse and effort, since he does all such things with
reservation and none of the events which oppose his [plans] befalls
him unexpectedly.
   And he is also gentle, gentleness being a condition according to which
they are gentle about doing what is fitting in all circumstances and do
not get swept away to anger in any circumstances. And he is calm and
orderly, orderliness being knowledge of fitting motions and calmness
being a proper organization of states of motion and rest of the soul and
body in accordance with nature; the opposites of these are traits of all
base men.
   Every honourable and good man is free of slander, since he is immune
to slander and so is free of slander in this sense and also in the sense
that he does not slander someone else. And slander is a falling out among
apparent friends because of a false utterance; this does not happen to
good men, but only base men slander and are slandered, and that is why
true friends neither slander nor are slandered, but [only] seeming and
apparent friends.
232                                                          l/-95 to l/-99

   Nor does the virtuous man ever stall on anything, since stalling is a
deferral of action because of hesitation; but he defers some things only
when the deferral is free of blame; for Hesiod said this of stalling: "do
not stall until tomorrow and the next day;" and "a man who puts off his
work always wrestles with disaster" 57 since stalling produces an abandon-
ment of one's proper jobs.
   12. So much for this. For Chrysippus discussed all the paradoxes in
many other works: in his On Doctrines and in the Outline [Definition] of
Rational Discourse and in many other treatises on special topics. But I
have already gone through in an adequate fashion as much as I intended
to deal with in the summary account of the ethical doctrines of <those>
who belong to the Stoic school of philosophy; [so] I shall put an end to
this notebook forthwith.

Sextus Empiricus M 11.200-201, 207                                  [11-96]
(SVF 3.516)
   200. In reply to this they say that all men have the same functions,
though it makes a difference whether they are carried out from a crafts-
manlike disposition or an uncraftsmanlike one. For taking care of one's
parents and otherwise honouring them is not the special function of a
virtuous man, but doing so from prudence is. 201. And just as healing
is common to the doctor and the layman, but doing so medically is the
special function of the craftsman, in the same way too honouring one's
parents is common to the virtuous man and the non-virtuous man; but
honouring one's parents from prudence is the special function of the
wise man; consequently he has a craft of life whose special function it is
to do each of the things which are done from a virtuous disposition ....
207. Just as in the intermediate crafts it is the special function of a
craftsman to do things regularly and to produce the same results consis-
tently (for even a layman could carry out the function of a craftsman,
but rarely and not all the time, and certainly not consistently in the same
manner), so too it is the function of a prudent man, they say, to be
consistent in his [morally] perfect actions, and just the opposite for the
imprudent man.

Stobaeus Anthology 4.39.22 vol. 5                                   [11-97]
p. 906.18-907.5 W-H (SVF 3.510)
  Chrysippus says: "he who makes [moral] progress to the highest degree
performs all the appropriate actions in all circumstances and omits none."

57. Works and Days 410, 413.
Ethics                                                                    233

And he says that his life is not yet happy, but that happiness supervenes
on him when these intermediate actions become secure and conditioned
and acquire a special sort of fixity.

Epictetus Discourses 2.6.6-10                                         [11-98]

   6. "Go and salute Mr. So-and-so." "All right, I salute him." "How?"
"Not in an abject fashion." "But you were shut out." "That's because I
haven't learned how to enter through the window. And when I find the
door shut [against me], I must either go away or enter through the
window." 7. "But speak with the man too!" "I do so." "How?" "Not in
an abject fashion." 8. "But you did not succeed."-Now surely that was
not your business, but his. So why do you encroach on what concerns
someone else? If you always remember what is yours and what concerns
someone else, you will never be disturbed. 9. That's why Chrysippus
was right to say, "As long as what comes next is non-evident to me, I
always cling to what is better suited to getting what is in accordance with
nature. For god himself made me such as to select those things. 10. But
if I knew for sure that it was fated for me now to be ill, I would even
seek [illness]. For my foot, if it had brains, would seek to be muddied."

Epictetus Discourses 2.10.1-6                                         [11-99]

    1. Consider who you are. First of all a man, i.e., you have nothing more
authoritative than your power of moral choice and all else is subordinate to
it, but it itself is free and independent. 2. Consider, then, what you are
separate from in virtue of your rationality. You are separate from wild
beasts and from sheep. 3. And in addition you are a citizen of the cosmos
and a part of it-not one of the servile parts but one of its principal
parts. For you are able to follow the divine administration and figure out
what comes next. 4. So, what is the role of a citizen? To have no private
advantage, not to deliberate about anything as though one were a separate
part, but just as if the hand or foot had reasoning power and were able
to follow the arrangements of nature, they would never have sought or
desired anything except after referring to the whole. 5. That is why the
philosophers are right to say that if the honourable and good man knew
what was going to happen, he would even collaborate with disease and
death and lameness, being aware that these things are dispensed by the
arrangement of the whole and that the whole is more authoritative than
the part and the state more authoritative than the citizen. 6. But now,
because we do not have this foreknowledge, it is appropriate for us to
cling to what is better suited for selection, since we are also born for this.
234                                                           //-100 to //-101

Cicero On Goals 5.16-21                                               [11-100]

   16. Since there is so much disagreement about this [the goal of life]
we should employ the division of Carneades, which our friend Antiochus
is so fond of using. Carneades discerned not only all the views which
philosophers had yet held about the highest good, but also all the views
which are possible. So he claimed that no craft took its starting point
from itself, since there is always something external which is the object
of the craft. We need not prolong this point with examples; for it is
obvious that no craft is concerned with itself, but the craft is distinct
from its object. So just as medicine is the craft of health and helmsmanship
is the craft of navigation, in the same way prudence is the craft of
living; therefore it too must be constituted by and take its principle from
something else. 17. It is a matter of general agreement that the concern
of prudence and its goal must be what is adapted and accommodated to
nature and such as to stimulate and stir up, all by itself, an impulse in
the mind (which the Greeks call horme). But there is no agreement about
what it is which thus moves us and which nature seeks from the moment
of birth-and that is the source of all the disagreement among philoso-
phers when they are considering what the highest good is. For the source
of the entire debate about the limits of good and bad, when they investigate
the extreme limits of each, is to be found in the primary natural affiliations;
and when that is found, the whole debate about the highest good and
[worst] bad [thing] is derived from it as from a source.
   18. Some philosophers think that our first impulse is to pleasure and
that our first avoidance is of pain. Others think that freedom from pain
is what we first welcome and that pain is the first object of avoidance.
Others again take their start from the things which they call primary
according to nature-a class in which they include the integrity and
preservation of all of our parts, health, sound sense organs, freedom from
pain, strength, good looks, and other things of this kind; similar to these
are the primary natural things in the soul, which are as it were the sparks
and seeds of the virtues. Since it is some one of these three which first
stirs nature into action, either to pursue something or to avoid it, and
since there can be no additional possibility beyond these three, it follows
necessarily that the tasks of pursuit and avoidance are to be referred to
one of these. Consequently, that prudence which we called the craft of
living is concerned with some one of those three things and takes from
it the basic principle for all of life.
   19. One's theory of what is right and honourable is derived from
whichever of these three which one has decided is the thing which
stimulates nature into action, and this theory can correspond with any
Ethics                                                                  235

one of the three. As a result, honourableness is either a matter of doing
everything for the sake of pleasure, even if you do not achieve it; or for
the sake of avoiding pain, even if you cannot manage this; or for the sake
of acquiring primary natural things even if you succeed in getting none
of them. So it is that disagreements about the starting points of nature
exactly correspond to disagreements about the limits of good and bad
things. Others again will start from the same principles and refer every
[question about] appropriate action either to [the actual attainment of]
pleasure or freedom from pain, or to the acquisition of the primary
natural things.
   20. So six views about the highest good have now been set forth, and
the chief spokesman for the last three are: for pleasure, Aristippus, for
freedom from pain, Hieronymus; and for the enjoyment of those things
which we have termed primary natural things it is Carneades himself-
not indeed that he believes in the view, but he does defend it for the
sake of argument. The other three were views which could be held, though
only one of them has ever been defended, but it has been defended with
great vigour. For no one has said that the plan of acting in such a way
that one does everything for the sake of pleasure, even if we do not achieve
anything, is nevertheless worth choosing for its sake and honourable and
the only good thing. Nor has anyone held that the very act of trying to
avoid pain was something worth choosing, unless one could actually
escape it. But that doing everything in order to acquire the primary
natural things, even if we do not succeed, is honourable and the only
thing worth choosing and the only good thing-that is what the Stoics say.
   21. These are the six simple views about the greatest good and bad
things; two without spokesmen, four which have actually been defended.
There has been a total of three composite or double accounts of the
highest good, and if you consider the nature of things carefully you will
see that there could not have been any more. For either pleasure can be
coupled with the honourable, as Callipho and Dinomachus held; or
freedom from pain, as Diodorus held; and so can the primary natural
things, which is the view of the ancients, as we call the Academics
and Peripatetics.

Galen On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and                          [11-101]
Plato 5.6.9-12 (5.470-471 K; SVF 3.12)
   Not satisfied with this, Posidonius made a clearer and stronger criticism
of Chrysippus for not having given a proper explanation of the goal.
This is what he said: "Some ignore this and limit living in agreement to
'doing whatever one can for the sake of the primary natural things' by
236                                                         //-101 to //-102

doing which they are doing much the same thing as they would be doing
if they claimed that the goal was pleasure or freedom from pain or
something else of the sort. There is something which reveals an internal
conflict in the very utterance [of this formulation of the goal], but there
is nothing which is honourable or could promote happiness. For this is
a consequence of the goal but is not the goal. But if one gets [the
formulation of] the goal right, one can use it to defeat the puzzles which
the sophists advance, but one cannot so use the [formula] 'living according
to experience of what happens in the whole of nature,' which is equivalent
to saying living in agreement, since this makes no small contribution to
achieving things indifferent."

Cicero On Goals 3.16-34                                            [11-102]

   16. The school whose views I follow [a Stoic speaks] holds that every
animal, as soon as it is born (for this should be our starting point), is
congenial to itself and inclined to preserve itself and its constitution,
and to like those things which preserve that constitution; but it finds
uncongenial its own death and those things which seem to threaten it.
They confirm this by [noting] that before pleasure or pain can affect
them, babies seek what is salutary and spurn what is not, and this would
not happen unless they loved their constitution and feared death. They
could not, however, desire anything unless they had a perception of
themselves and consequently loved themselves. From this one ought to
see that the principle [of human action] is derived from self-love. 17.
Most Stoics do not think that pleasure should be classed among the
primary natural things; and I strongly agree with them, for fear that, if
nature seemed to have classed pleasure among the primary objects of
impulse, then many shameful consequences would follow. It seems, how-
ever, to be a sufficient argument as to why we love those things which
were first accepted because of nature [to say] that there is no one (when
he has a choice) who would not prefer to have all the parts of his
body in a sound condition to having them dwarfed or twisted, though
equally useful.
   They think, moreover, that acts of cognition (which we may call grasps
or perceptions or, if these terms are either displeasing or harder to
understand, katalepseis) are, then, to be accepted for their own sake, since
they have in themselves something which as it were includes and contains
the truth. And this can be seen in babies, who, we see, are delighted if
they figure something out for themselves, even if it does not do them
any good. 18. We also think that the crafts are to be taken for their own
sake, both because there is in them something worth taking and also
Ethics                                                                     237

because they consist of acts of cognition and contain something which
is rational and methodical. They think, though, that we find false assent
more uncongenial than anything else which is contrary to nature ....
   20. Let us move on, then, since we began from these natural principles
and what follows should be consistent with them. There follows this
primary division: they say that what has value (we are to call it that, I
think) is that which is either itself in accordance with nature or productive
of it, so that it is worthy of selection because it has a certain 'weight'
which is worth valuing (and this [value] they call axia); by contrast, what
is opposite to the above is disvalued. The starting point being, then, so
constituted that what is natural is to be taken for its own sake and what
is unnatural is to be rejected, the first appropriate action (for that is what
I call kathekon) is that it should preserve itself in its natural constitution;
and then that it should retain what is according to nature and reject what
is contrary to nature. After this [pattern of] selection and rejection is
discovered, there then follows appropriate selection, and then constant
[appropriate] selection, and finally [selection] which is stable and in
agreement with nature; and here for the first time we begin to have and
to understand something which can truly be called good. 21. For man's
first sense of congeniality is to what is according to nature; but as soon
as he gets an understanding, or rather a conception (which they call an
ennoia) and sees the ordering and, I might say, concord of things which
are to be done, he then values that more highly than all those things
which he loved in the beginning, and he comes to a conclusion by
intelligence and reasoning, with the result that he decides that this is
what the highest good for man consists in, which is is to be praised and
chosen for its own sake. And since it is placed in what the Stoics call
homologia, let us call it agreement, if you please. Since, therefore, this
constitutes the good, to which all things are to be referred, honourable
actions and the honourable itself-which is considered to be the only
good-although it arises later [in our lives], nevertheless it is the only
thing which is to be chosen in virtue of its own character and value; but
none of the primary natural things is to be chosen for its own sake. 22.
Since, however, those things which I called appropriate actions proceed
from the starting points [established] by nature, it is necessary that they
be referred to them; so it is right to say all appropriate actions are referred
to acquisition of the natural principles, not however in the sense that
this is the highest good, since honourable action is not among the primarily
and naturally congenial things. That, as I said, is posterior and arises
later. But [such action] is natural and encourages us to choose it much
more than all the earlier mentioned things.
   But here one must first remove a misunderstanding, so that no one
238                                                                    //-102

might think that there are two highest goods. For just as, if it is someone's
purpose to direct a spear or arrow at something, we say that his highest
goal is to do everything he can in order to direct it at [the target], in the
same sense that we say that our highest goal is a good. The archer in
this comparison is to do all that he can to direct [his arrow at the target];
and yet doing all that he can to attain his purpose would be like the
highest goal of the sort which we say is the highest good in life; actually
striking [the target], though, is as it were to be selected and not to
be chosen.
    23. Since all appropriate actions proceed from the natural principles,
it is necessary that wisdom itself proceed from them as well. But just as
it often happens that he who is introduced to someone puts a higher
value on the man to whom he is introduced than on the man by whom
he was introduced, just so it is in no way surprising that we are first
introduced to wisdom by the starting points [established] by nature, but
that later on wisdom itself becomes dearer to us than the things which
brought us to wisdom. And just as our limbs were given us in such a
way that they seem to have been given for the sake of a certain way of
life, similarly the impulse in our soul, which is called horme in Greek,
seems not to have been given for the sake of any old type of life but for
a certain kind of living; and similarly for reason and perfected reason.
24. Just as an actor or dancer has not been assigned just any old [type
of] delivery or movement but rather a certain definite [type]; so too life
is to be lived in a certain definite manner, not in any old [manner]. And
we call that manner 'in agreement' and consonant. And we do not think
that wisdom is like navigation or medicine, but rather like the craft of
acting or dancing which I just mentioned; thus its goal, i.e., the [proper]
execution of the craft, depends on it itself and is not sought outside itself.
There is also another point of dissimilarity between wisdom and these
crafts, viz. that in them proper actions do not contain all the components
[lit. parts] which constitute the art; but things called 'right' or 'rightly
done', if I may call them that, though the Greeks call them katorthomata
[morally perfect actions], contain all the features of virtue. Only wisdom
is totally self-contained, and this is not the case with the other crafts.
25. But it is misguided to compare the highest goal of medicine or
navigation with that of wisdom; for wisdom embraces magnanimity and
justice and an ability to judge that everything which happens to a [mere]
human being is beneath it-and this does not apply to the rest of the
crafts. But no one can possess the very virtues which I just mentioned
unless he has firmly decided that there is nothing except what is honour-
able or shameful which makes a difference or distinguishes one [thing
or situation] from another.
Ethics                                                                   239

   26. Let us now see how splendidly these further points follow from
what I have already expounded .... So, since the goal is to live consistently
and in agreement with nature, it follows necessarily that all wise men
always live happy, perfect and fortunate lives, that they are impeded by
nothing, hindered by nothing and in need of nothing. The key not only
to the doctrines of which I am speaking, but also to our life and fortune
is that we should judge that only what is honourable is good. This point
can be elaborated and developed fully and copiously, with all the choicest
words and profoundest sentiments which rhetorical art can produce; but
I prefer the short and pointed syllogisms of the Stoics.
   27. Their arguments go like this: everything which is good is praisewor-
thy; but everything which is praiseworthy is honourable; therefore, that
which is good is honourable. Does this argument seem valid enough?
Surely it does; for as you see the argument concludes with a point which
is proven by the two premisses. Generally speaking, people attack the
former of the two premisses and claim that it is not the case that everything
which is good is praiseworthy; for they concede that what is praiseworthy
is honourable. But it is totally absurd [to claim] that something is good
but not worth choosing, or worth choosing but not pleasing, or pleasing
but not also to be loved; and so it is also to be approved of; so it is also
praiseworthy; but that is [the same as] honourable. So it turns out that
what is good is also honourable.
   28. Next, I ask who can boast of a life if it is wretched or even just
not happy. So we boast only of a happy life. From this it results that
the happy life is, if I may put it so, worth boasting about; and this cannot
properly [be said to] happen to any life but one which is honourable. So
it turns out that an honourable life is a happy life. Moreover, since
someone who is justly praised must have about him something remarkable,
either in point of honour or glory, so that he can justly be called happy
on account of these very valuable attributes, the same thing can be said
most properly about the life of such a man. So if the honourable is a
criterion for a happy life, one must hold that what is honourable is
also good.
   29. What? Could anyone deny that we could never have a man who
is of steadfast and reliable spirit, a man you could call brave, unless it
is firmly established that pain is not a bad thing? For just as someone
who regards death as a bad thing cannot help but fear it, in the same
way no one can be indifferent to and despise something which he regards
as bad. Once this point is established and assented to, our next premiss
is that magnanimous and strong-hearted men are able to despise and
ignore everything which fortune can bring to bear against man. Conse-
quently, it is proven that there is nothing bad which is not also shameful.
240                                                       //-102 to //-103

But the man we refer to is lofty and superior, magnanimous, truly brave,
looks down on all merely human concerns; the man, I say, whom we
wish to produce, whom we are looking for, should certainly have faith
in himself and his life, both past and future, and should think well of
himself, believing that nothing bad can happen to a wise man. And from
this one can again prove the same old point, that only the honourable is
good, i.e., that to live happily is to live honourably, i.e., virtuously.
   30. I am not unaware that there is a variety of views held by philoso-
phers, by which I mean those who place the highest good, which I call
the goal, in the mind. Even though some of them have gone wrong, still
I prefer them, whatever their views, who locate the highest good in the
mind and virtue, to those three who have separated the highest good
from virtue by placing either pleasure or freedom from pain or the
primary natural things among the highest goods; I even prefer them to
the other three who thought that virtue would be deficient without some
addition and so added to it one or other of the three things mentioned
above. 31. But those who think that the highest good is to live with
knowledge and who claim that things are absolutely indifferent and that
this was why the wise man would be happy, because he did not prefer
one thing to any other in even the slightest degree-they are particularly
absurd; so too are those who, as certain Academics are said to have held,
believe that the highest good and greatest duty of the wise man is to
resist his presentations and steadfastly to withhold his assent. Normally
one gives a full answer to each of these views separately. But there is no
need to prolong what is perfectly clear; and what is more obvious than
that the very prudence which we are seeking and praising would be
utterly destroyed if there were no grounds for choosing between those
which are contrary to nature and those which are according to nature?
When we eliminate, therefore, those views I have mentioned and those
which are similar to them, all that is left is [the view] that the highest
good is to live by making use of a knowledge of what happens naturally,
selecting what is according to nature and rejecting what is contrary to
nature, i.e., to live consistently and in agreement with nature.
   32. When in the other crafts something is said to be craftsmanlike,
one must suppose that what is meant is something which is, in a way,
posterior and consequent, which they [the Greeks] call epigennematikon
[supervenient]; but when we say that something is done wisely we mean
that it is from the outset thoroughly right. For whatever is undertaken
by a wise man must immediately be complete in all its parts; for it is in
this that we find what we call that which is worth choosing. For just as
it is a [moral] mistake to betray one's country, to attack one's parents,
to rob temples (and these are [moral] mistakes because of the outcome
Ethics                                                                  241

[of the action]), so too it is a [moral] mistake to fear, to grieve, and to
suffer desire, even quite independently of their outcome. Rather, just as
the latter are not dependent on their posterior consequences, but are
[moral] mistakes right from the outset, similarly the actions which proceed
from virtue are to be judged to be right from the outset and not by their
ultimate completion.
    33. 'Good', which has been used so frequently in this discussion, is
also explained with a definition. The definitions offered by [the Stoics]
do differ from each other, but only very slightly; for all that, they are
getting at the same point. I agree with Diogenes who defined good as
that which is perfect in its nature. He followed this up by defining the
beneficial (let us use this term for ophelema) as a motion or condition
which is in accord with what is perfect in its nature. And since we acquire
conceptions of things if we learn something either by direct experience
or by combination or by similarity or by rational inference, the conception
of good is created by the last method mentioned. For the mind attains
a conception of the good when it ascends by rational inference from those
things which are according to nature. 34. But the good itself is not
perceived to be good or called good because of some addition or increase
or comparison with other things, but in virtue of its own special character.
For honey, although it is the sweetest thing, is nevertheless perceived to
be sweet not because of a comparison with other things, but because of
its own distinctive flavour; in the same way the good, which is the subject
of our discussion, is indeed most valuable, but that value derives meaning
from its distinctive type and not from its magnitude. For value (which
is called axia) is not counted as either good or bad; consequently, however
much you might increase it, it will still remain in the same general
category. Therefore, there is one kind of value which applies to virtue, and
it derives its meaning from its distinctive type and not from its magnitude.

Cicero On Goals 3.62-70 (selections)                               [11-103]

   62. Again, they think it important to understand that nature has brought
it about that children are loved by their parents. For from this starting
point we can follow the development of the shared society which unites
the human race. One ought to see this first of all from the form and
organs of the body which show that nature has a rational scheme for
reproduction; but it would be inconsistent for nature to want offspring
to be born and yet not to see to it that they are loved once they are born.
The power of nature can be seen even in the beasts; when we see the
effort they go to in bearing and rearing their offspring, we seem to be
listening to the voice of nature herself. So, just as it is obvious that we
242                                                          //-103 to //-106

naturally shrink from pain, so too it is apparent that we are driven by
nature herself to love those whom we bear. 63. From this it develops
naturally that there is among men a common and natural congeniality
of men with each other, with the result that it is right for them to feel
that other men, just because they are men, are not alien to them .... So
we are naturally suited to [living in] gatherings, groups and states.
   64. They also hold that the cosmos is ruled by the will of the gods,
that it is like a city or state shared by gods and men, and that each and
every one of us is a part of this cosmos. From which it naturally follows
that we put the common advantage ahead of our own. For just as the
laws put the well-being of all ahead of the well-being of individuals, so
too the good and wise man, who is obedient to the laws and not unaware
of his civic duty, looks out for the advantage of all more than for that
of any one person or his own ....
   67. But just as they think that the bonds of justice unite men with
each other, so too they deny that there is any bond of justice between
man and beast. Chrysippus expressed it well, saying that everything else
was born for the sake of men and gods, but they were born for the sake
of their own community and society, with the result that men can use
beasts for their own advantage without injustice....
   70. They also think that friendship should be cultivated because it
falls into the class of beneficial things. Although some [Stoics] say that
in a friendship a friend's reason is just as dear to the wise man as is his
own, while others say that each man's reason is dearer to himself, even
this latter group admits that to deprive someone of something in order
to appropriate it for oneself is inconsistent with justice, which is a virtue
we are naturally committed to. So the school I am speaking of does not
at all approve of the view that justice or friendship should be welcomed
or approved of because of its advantages. For the very same advantages
could just as well undermine and overthrow them. Indeed, neither justice
nor friendship can exist at all unless they are chosen for their own sakes.

Epictetus Discourses 1.22.1-4                                       [11-104]

   1. Basic grasps are common to all men, and one basic grasp does not
conflict with another; for which of us does not suppose that the good is
advantageous and worth choosing and that one ought to go for it and
pursue it in all circumstances? Which of us does not suppose that the
good is honourable and fitting? So where does the conflict come from?
2. In the application of basic grasps to individual substances; 3. as when
one man says "He did well and is brave!" [and someone else says,] "No,
he is crazy." This is the source of the conflict between men. 4. The
Ethics                                                                       243

conflict between the Jews and the Syrians and Egyptians and Romans is
not about whether the sacred must be honoured above all else and pursued
in all instances, but about whether this particular thing, eating pork, is
sacred or not.

Epictetus Discourses 2.11.13, 16                                        [11-105]
   13. Consider the starting point of philosophy: a perception of the
mutual conflict among men and a search for the cause of the conflict;
[plus] the rejection and distrust of mere opinion, an investigation of
opinion to see if it is right, and the discovery of some canon, like scales
which we discover for [measuring] heavy things and the ruler which [we
discover for distinguishing] what is straight and crooked ....
   16. So is there no canon here higher than mere opinion? But how is
it possible for what is most vital to men to be undeterminable and
undiscoverable?

Seneca, On Peace of Mind 13.2-14.2                                      [11-106]
   13.2. For a man who does many things frequently puts himself in
fortune's power. But the safest course is to tempt fortune rarely, and
always to be mindful of her and never to put any trust in her promises.
Say "I shall set sail unless something intervenes" and "I shall become
praetor unless something hinders me" and "my enterprise will be success-
ful unless something interferes". 13.3. This is why we say that nothing
happens to a wise man contrary to his expectations; we free him not
from the misfortunes but from the blunders of mankind, nor do all these
things turn out as he has wished but as he has thought. But his first
thought has been that something might obstruct his plans. Then, too,
the suffering that comes to the mind from the frustration of desire must
necessarily be much lighter if you have not certainly promised it success.
   14.1. We ought also to make ourselves adaptable, so that we do not
become too fond of the plans we have formed and we should pass readily
to the condition to which chance has led us and not dread shifting either
purpose or positions, provided we avoid fickleness, a vice which poses a
most grave threat to mental equilibrium. For obstinacy, from which
fortune often wrests some concession, must needs be anxious and un-
happy, and fickleness is much worse if it does not restrain itself. Both
are hostile to peace of mind: being unable to make any change and being
unable to endure anything. 14.2. At all events the mind must be withdrawn
from all externals into itself. Let it trust in itself, rejoice in itself, esteem
its own possessions, retreat as much as it can from things not its own,
devote itself to itself, feel no damage and even take setbacks in a generous
244                                                       //-106 to //-107

spmt. When he received news of a shipwreck and heard that all his
possessions had been lost with the ship, Zeno, the head of our school,
said "fortune bids me to follow philosophy bearing a lighter load".

Seneca, Letters on Ethics 121.1-24                               [11-107]

   1. I can see that you will quarrel when I have expounded for you
today's theme, which we have already spent quite some time with; yet
again you will cry out, "what does this have to do with ethics?" Exclaim
away, until I can, first, give you the names of others to quarrel with,
Posidonius and Archidemus ...
   5. Meanwhile let me examine some questions which seem to be a bit
too far removed [from your practical concerns]. We were asking whether
all animals had an awareness of their own constitution. The best evidence
that this is so was that they move their limbs in a fitting and efficient
manner, as though they had been trained to do so; each animal has a
nimble mastery of his various parts. A craftsman handles his tools with
ease; a helmsman controls the rudder with skill; and a painter can very
quickly apply the many and varied colours which he sets out on his
palette for the purpose of capturing a likeness, and moves back and forth
between the hot wax and the canvas with a ready hand and eye. In the
same way an animal is expeditious in the use of himself. 6. We often
admire skilled dancers because their hands are capable of expressing all
kinds of objects and emotions and their gestures are responsive to the
rapidly uttered words. What art gives to these men, nature provides to
the animals. They do this as soon as they are born; they come into this
world with this knowledge; they are born with a sound training.
   7. "And so," he says, "animals move their parts in a fitting manner
because if they moved them any differently they would feel pain. Thus,
on your theory, they are forced [to act as they do] and it is fear which
leads them to correct action, not choice." This is false; for things which
are driven by necessity are slow; nimbleness belongs to those who move
of their own free will. Far from it being fear of pain which drives them
to this [behaviour], they even strive for their natural motions when pain
discourages them. 8. Consider a baby who is practicing standing up and
learning how to walk; as soon as he begins to try his strength he falls
and, in tears, gets up again and again until despite the pain he trains
himself to the [function] demanded by his nature. Some animals, who
have hard shells, can be turned over on their backs and they will strain
and push with their feet and twist themselves for a long time, until they
get back in their [proper] posture. Yet the turtle feels no pain when
on his back; he is uneasy, nevertheless, because he desires his natural
Ethics                                                                      245

constitution and does not stop straining and flailing until he gets to his feet.
9. Therefore, all [animals] have an awareness of their own constitution and
that is the source of their very expeditious handling of their limbs. We
have no better evidence that they come into life equipped with this
knowledge than the fact that no animal is clumsy in handling himself.
   10. "The constitution is," he says, "according to you, the leading part
of the soul in a certain disposition relative to the body. How can a baby
understand this, which is so complex and subtle and hard even for you
to explain? All animals ought to be born as dialecticians so that they can
understand that definition, which is opaque to most Roman citizens."
11. Your objection would be valid ifl were saying that animals understood
the definition of constitution and not the constitution itself. Nature is
more easily understood than explained. And so that baby does not know
what a constitution is, but does know his constitution; he does not know
what an animal is, but he knows that he is an animal. 12. Furthermore,
he understands that constitution of his vaguely and in outline and dimly.
We too know that we have a soul; what the soul is, where it is, what it
is like or where it came from-that we do not know. Our awareness of
our own soul (despite our ignorance of its nature and location) is to us
in the same relation as the awareness of their constitution is to all animals.
It is necessary that they be aware of that through which they are also
aware of other things; it is necessary that they have an awareness of that
thing which they obey, by which they are governed. 13. Every one of us
understands that there is something which sets our impulses in motion;
but we do not know what that thing is. Thus babies and animals also
have an awareness, neither very clear nor distinct, of the leading part
in them.
   14. "You say," he says, "that every animal first finds his own constitu-
tion congenial [to himself]; but a man's constitution is rational and so
man finds not his animality but his rationality congenial [to himself]; for
man is dear to himself in virtue of that part which makes him a man.
So how can a baby find congenial a rational constitution when he is not
yet rational?" 15. There is a different constitution for every age; one for
the baby, one for the child, <one for the teen-ager>, one for the old man.
All find the constitution which they are in congenial. A baby lacks teeth;
he finds that constitution congenial. His teeth appear; he finds that
constitution congenial. For the plant which will turn into mature crop
has a different constitution when it is tender and barely poking its nose
out of the furrow, another when it gains strength and stands, admittedly
with an unripe stalk but one able to support its own weight, and another
when it ripens and gets ready for the threshing floor and the ear firms
up; it looks to and adapts itself to whatever constitution it achieves. 16.
246                                                            //-107 to //-108

There are different stages of life for a baby, a boy, a teen-ager, and an
old man; yet I am, for all that, the same [person] as the baby and the
boy and the teen-ager I used to be. Thus, although each man's constitution
changes [from one stage to another], the congeniality he feels towards
his constitution is the same. For nature does not commend to me a boy
or a youth or an old man, but myself. Therefore, a baby finds his own
constitution congenial, the one he then has and not the one which he
will have as a youth; the fact that he will have something greater to
change into some day does not mean that the state in which he is born
is not according to nature. 17. First of all, the animal finds itself congenial;
for there must be something to which all else can be referred. I seek
pleasure. For whose sake? Mine. Therefore, I am looking out for myself.
I flee pain. For whose sake? My own. Therefore, I am looking out for
myself. If I do everything in order to look out for myself, then looking
out for myself is prior to everything else. This concern for oneself is in
all animals; it is not acquired, it is innate. 18. Nature brings forth her
young, she does not abandon them. And since the most certain guardian-
ship is the closest, everyone is entrusted to himself. Thus, as I said in
my earlier letter, young animals, even those who have just recently
emerged from their mother's womb or egg, know immediately what is
dangerous and they avoid what is life-threatening. Animals which are at
risk from birds of prey even avoid the shadows cast by predators as they
fly over. No animal comes into life without a fear of death.
   19. "How," he says, "can a newborn animal understand what is salutary
or life-threatening?" First of all, the point at issue is whether it under-
stands, not how it understands. It is clear that they do understand from
the fact that they behave no differently than [they would] if they did
understand. Why is it that a hen does not flee a peacock or a goose, but
does flee a hawk, which is so much smaller and is not even known to it
yet? Why do chicks fear a cat, but not a dog? Obviously, they have a
knowledge of what is liable to harm them which is not acquired by
experience; for before they can acquire any experience they are already
cautious. 20. Next, in order that you should not think that this is an
accident, they neither fear things which they need not fear nor do they
ever forget this care and diligence; the avoidance of danger is their lifelong
companion. Moreover, they do not become more timid as they live; from
this it is obvious that they do not get this characteristic by practice but
from a natural love of their own preservation. What practice teaches is
late and various; whatever nature passes on is the same for all [members
of a species] and instantaneous. 21. If, however, you insist, I shall tell
how every animal is compelled to understand what is dangerous. It is
aware that it is made of flesh; and so it is aware of what can cut and
Ethics                                                                   247

burn and bruise flesh, of the animals which are equipped for hurting it;
it regards their appearance as hostile and threatening. These things are
closely connected; for as soon as each animal takes its safety to be conge-
nial, it seeks what will help it and fears what will harm it. There are
natural impulses to what is useful and natural rejections of the opposite.
Whatever nature teaches comes without any thought to enunciate it,
without planning. 22. Do you not see how sophisticated bees are in
building their hives, how much cooperation there is all round in the
division of the necessary tasks? Do you not see that the weaving of a
spider cannot be imitated by any mortal, [do you not see] how much
work it takes to arrange the threads-some set in a straight line as a kind
of framework, others spun in a circle to fill in the pattern, so that smaller
animals (for whose destruction such webs are woven) might be caught
and held as though in a net? 23. That craft is born, not learned. Therefore,
no one animal is any more skilled than any other; you will see that the
webs of spiders are all the same, the cells in all the corners of honeycombs
are all the same. What craft passes on is indefinite and uneven. What
nature distributes comes equally. She passes on nothing more than care
of oneself and skill in that, and that is also why they begin to live and
learn at the same time. 24. And it is not surprising that animals are born
with those things without which it would be pointless for them to be
born. Nature gave them this as their first tool for survival: congeniality
with and love for themselves. They could not have been safe if they did
not want to be; this would not have been beneficial all on its own, but
without it nothing else would have been either. But in no animal will
you find contempt for itself, nor even neglect; even silent and brutish
animals have the cunning required to live, although they are stupid in
all else. You will see that even animals which are useless to others do
not let themselves down.
   Farewell.

Seneca Letters on Ethics 117.2-3                                    [11-108]

    2. Our school believes that the good is a body, because that which is
good acts and whatever acts is a body. What is good benefits [someone];
but for something to benefit [someone] it ought to act; and if it acts, it
is a body. They say that wisdom is good; it follows that it is also necessary
to say that it is corporeal 3. But being wise is not in the same category.
It is an incorporeal attribute of something else, viz. wisdom; consequently
it neither acts nor benefits [anyone]. 'What then?' he says, 'do we not
say that being wise is good?' We do say so, but only by reference to that
on which it depends, i.e., to wisdom itself.
248                                                          //-109 to //-110

Seneca Letters on Ethics 120.3-14                                    [11-109]

    So now I return to the topic you wish to have discussed, which is how
we get our conception of what is good and honourable. 4. Nature could
not have taught us this: she has given us the seeds of knowledge, but
not the knowledge itself. Some people say that we stumble onto the
notion, but it is unbelievable that anyone should learn the form of virtue
by chance. Our view is that it is the result of the observation and compari-
son to each other of frequently performed actions; our school thinks the
honourable and the good are understood by analogy ... Let me explain
what this analogy is. 5. We know what bodily health is; from this we
suppose that there is also a kind of health of the soul. We know what
bodily strength is; from this we infer that there is also a kind of strength
of the soul. Certain generous and humane deeds, certain brave deeds
struck us so forcefully that we began to admire them as though they
were perfect. They contained many faults, but these were hidden by the
shining beauty of a remarkable deed; these we ignored. Nature commands
us to magnify what is praiseworthy, and everyone exaggerates what is
glorious. It is from such actions that we derive the form of a great good ....
    8.... I shall add a point which will perhaps seem amazing: sometimes
bad things contribute to the form of the honourable and what is best
shines forth from its opposite. As you know, the virtues are quite close
to their opposites, and there is a similarity between what is right and
things which are corrupt and shameful. Thus the spendthrift mimics the
generous man, though there is a very great difference between someone
who knows how to give and someone who does not know how to save .
. . . Carelessness imitates easy-goingness; rashness imitates bravery. 9.
This similarity forced us to pay attention and to distinguish things which
are formally quite close to each other but in fact radically different. While
we were watching those who have been made famous by some outstanding
deed, we began to note who has done something with a noble spirit and
great effort, but only once. We saw a man brave in war, but a coward
in politics, a man who endured poverty with spirit, but disgrace with
shame. [In these cases] we praised the deed and held the man in contempt.
    10. But we have [also] seen a different man, who is kind to his friends,
moderate to his enemies, governing public and private affairs in a pious
and religious manner; we saw that he did not lack patience in enduring
what had to be endured or prudence in doing what had to be done. We
have seen his generosity in distributing, his effort and determination
(which relieve bodily weariness) in working. Moreover, he was always
consistent in every action, not good by some plan, but by character the
sort of person who was not only able to act properly, but could not act
Ethics                                                                  249

otherwise. 11. In this man we came to understand perfect virtue, and
we distinguished it into parts: the desires were to be held in check, fears
repressed, plans made for action, what was owed was to be distributed;
so we grasped temperance, courage, prudence, and justice and we assigned
to each its own appropriate role. So where did we get our understanding
of virtue? It was shown to us by his orderliness, fittingness and consis-
tency, by the mutual harmony of all his actions, and by his greatness which
elevated itself above all else. This is the source for our understanding of
the happy life which flows smoothly in its own course and is completely
in control of itself.
    12. So how did this make itself apparent to us? I shall tell you. This
perfect and virtuous man never cursed fortune, was never sad about what
happened, regarded himself as a citizen and soldier of the cosmos and
so endured all his labours as though he were under orders. Whatever
happened, he did not scorn it as inflicted upon him by chance, but took
it as a job assigned to him. He says, "This, whatever it may be, is mine;
it is harsh and difficult, but it is to this that I must devote my efforts."
13. A man who never whined over misfortune and never complained
about his fate of necessity appears to be great. He provided many people
with an understanding of himself, like a light shining in the darkness;
he attracted attention from everyone, though he was quiet and mild,
equally able to handle human and divine affairs. 14. He had a mind
which was perfect and had achieved its full potential; there is nothing
greater, except the mind of god, from whom some portion was diverted
into his mortal breast. This part is never more divine than when contem-
plating its mortality and realizing that man was born for dying, that his
body is not a home but a guest-house-and a brief one at that, since it
must be vacated when you see that you are a burden to your host.

Seneca Letters on Ethics 124.1-20                                  [11-110]

   1. ... The question is whether the good is grasped with the senses
or the mind; connected with this is the fact that the good is not found
in dumb animals and infants. 2. Those who make pleasure supreme hold
that the good is perceptible, but we on the other hand attribute it to the
mind and hold that it is intelligible. If the senses made judgements about
the good, we would not reject any pleasure; for no pleasure fails to attract
us and every pleasure pleases us; conversely, we would not willingly
suffer any pain; for every pain hurts our senses. 3. Moreover, those who
are excessively pleased by pleasure and who fear pain more than anything
else would not deserve criticism. But in point of fact we do disapprove
of those who are devoted to their bellies and to pleasure and we hold in
250                                                                    //-110

contempt those whose fear of pain prevents them from ever daring to
act in a manly fashion. What are they doing wrong if they obey their
senses, i.e., the judges of what is good and bad? For you have handed
over the decision about what is good and bad to the senses. 4. But surely
it is reason which is in charge of that matter; that is what makes the
decisions about good and bad, just as it does about the happy life, about
virtue and about the honourable. But [the hedonists] let the lowest part
[of man] make the decisions about what is better, so that judgement is
pronounced on the good by sense perception, which is blunt and lazy,
and slower in men than it is in beasts. 5. What [would we think] if
someone wanted to discriminate tiny things not by the eyes but by
touch? ...
   6. He says, "Just as every branch of knowledge and every craft takes
something which is obvious and is grasped by sense perception as the
starting point from which it will develop, similarly, the happy life must
take something obvious as its foundation and starting point. Surely you
say that the happy life has something obvious as its starting point." 7.
We say that those things which are in accordance with nature are happy.
And what is in accordance with nature is out in the open and immediately
apparent, just as is the case with what is healthy. I do not call the natural,
[i.e.,] what immediately affects a newborn [animal], good, but rather the
starting point of the good. You give over the highest good, i.e., pleasure,
to infancy, so that a newborn starts out from the point which a fully
accomplished man [might hope to] reach. You put the top of the tree
where the roots ought to be. 8. It would be a blatant error if someone
said that the fetus hidden in its mother's womb, still of uncertain sex,
immature, unfinished and not yet formed, were already in some good
condition. And yet, how small is the difference between one who is just
in the act of receiving life and one who lies as a hidden burden inside
its mother's body. As far as an understanding of good and bad is con-
cerned, both are equally mature; an infant is no more capable of the good
than a tree or some dumb animal! But why is the good not found in a
tree or a dumb animal? Because reason is not there either. That is also
the reason why it is missing in an infant; for infants too lack reason. It
attains the good when it attains reason.
   9. There is such a thing as a non-rational animal; and such a thing as
an animal which is not yet rational; and one which is rational but not
yet perfect. In none of them can you find the good, which is brought
with reason. What is the difference, then, between the [kinds of animal]
I have mentioned? In the non-rational the good will never exist; in that
which is not yet rational the good cannot exist just then; <in the rational>
but imperfect the good is already able to <exist>, but does not. 10. I
Ethics                                                                     251

maintain, Lucilius, that the good is not found in just any body, nor in
just any age; it is as far from the state of infancy as the last is from the
first and as the perfect is from its starting point; so it is not found in a
young body, still immature and in the process of formation. Of course
it is not found there, any more than it is found in the seed!
    11. You could put it like this: we are familiar with the good in a tree
or a plant: it does not lie in the first sprouts which are just breaking the
soil as they sprout. There is something good in a stalk of wheat, but it
is not yet present in the sappy sprout nor when the tender ear [first]
emerges from the husk, but when it ripens with the heat of summer and
its proper maturity. Just as every nature refuses to bring forth its good
until it is finished, so too man's good is not present in man until his
reason is perfected. 12. But what is this good? I shall say: a free and
upright mind, superior to other things and inferior to nothing. So far is
infancy from having this good that childhood does not hope for it, and
adolescence is wrong to hope for it. We are lucky if it comes with old
age as a result of long and serious effort. If this is what is good, it is
also intelligible.
    13. He says, "You said that there was a certain [kind of] good which
belongs to a tree and to a plant; so there can also be a certain [kind of]
good in an infant." The true good is not in trees or dumb animals; what
is good in them is called good by courtesy. "What is this?" you say.
[Merely] that which is in accord with the nature of each. But the good
can in no way apply to a dumb animal; it belongs to a happier and better
nature. Where there is no room for reason, there is no good. 14. There
are these four kinds of natures: that of a tree, of an animal, of a man
and of a god. The latter two are rational and have the same nature and
differ [only] in that the one is immortal and the other mortal. Nature
perfects the goodness of one of these, i.e., god, while effort perfects the
goodness of the other, i.e., man. The others, which lack reason, are
perfect in their own natures, but not really perfect. For in the final analysis
the only thing which is perfect is that which is perfect in accordance with
universal nature; and universal nature is rational. The other things can
[only] be perfect in their own kind. 15. And in this there cannot exist a
happy life, nor that which produces a happy life. But a happy life is
produced by good things. In a dumb animal the happy life does not exist,
<nor does that by which a happy life> is produced: the good does not
exist in a dumb animal.
    16. A dumb animal grasps what is present by its senses; it remembers
past events when it meets with something which reminds its senses, as
a horse is reminded of the road when it is placed at its starting point.
But when in the stable he has no recollection of the road, no matter how
252                                                                      l/-110 to //-113

often he has trodden it. The third [part of] time, i.e., the future, does
not apply to dumb animals. 17. So how can their nature seem to be
perfect when they cannot make use of the past? 58 For time consists of
three parts, past, present and future. For animals the present is the
briefest and most transitory time; they rarely recall the past, and then
only when it is occasioned by the occurence of something in the present.
18. Therefore, the good of a perfected nature cannot exist in an imperfect
nature, or if such a nature has it, so do plants. I do not deny that dumb
animals have great and powerful impulses towards achieving what is
according to their natures; but they are disorderly and confused. But the
good is never disorderly or confused. 19. "What, then?" you say, "are
dumb animals moved in a thoroughly confused and disorganized fashion?"
I would say that they are moved in a thoroughly confused and disorganized
fashion, if their nature were capable of orderliness; but as it is, each is
moved according to his own nature. Disorganized is [a term] reserved
for those things which can sometimes move in a non-disorganized fashion;
troubled [a term reserved] for that which can be free of care. Nothing
has a vice if it cannot have virtue; and such is the motion of dumb
animals by their very nature. 20. But to avoid detaining you any longer,
there will be a kind of good in a dumb animal, a kind of virtue, and a
kind of perfection; but there will not be good or virtue or perfection in
an absolute sense, since these properties apply only to rational animals,
to whom it has been given to know why, to what extent, and how. So
nothing which does not have reason can possess the good ....

Plutarch On Common Conceptions 1076ab                                              [11-111]
(SVF 3.246)
   (1076a) ... So the third element in their conception of the gods is
that the gods are superior to men in respect to nothing so much as their
happiness and virtue. But according to Chrysippus they do not have
even this superiority, for Zeus does not surpass Dion in virtue, and Zeus
and Dion are benefitted equally by each other when one meets with a
motion of the other, since they are [both] wise. For this is the only good
which men get from the gods and the gods get from men when they
become wise. (1076b) They say that if a man is not deficient in virtue
he in no way falls short in happiness, but Zeus the saviour is no more
blessed than the unfortunate man who commits suicide because of his
bodily diseases and impairments-providing that he is wise.


58. "Past time" in Latin is tempus perfectum. The pun on 'perfect' is not readily translated.
Ethics                                                                  253

Plutarch On Common Conceptions 1069e                               [11-112]
(SVF 3.491)
   [Chrysippus] says, "So where shall I start from? And what am I to
take as the principle of appropriate action and the raw material for virtue,
if I give up nature and what is according to nature?"


Plutarch On Stoic Self-Contradictions                              [11-113]
1035a-d (SVF 2.42, 30; 3.326, 68)
   (1035a) Chrysippus thinks that young men ought to study logic first,
ethics second and then physics, and theology last of all as the culmination
of the others. He says this in many places, but it will suffice to cite
literally what is said in book four of On Lives: "First of all I think,
following the correct account given by the ancients, that there are three
kinds of theorems to be studied by a philosopher, those of logic, those
of ethics and those of physics; and then that we must put the logical
first, the ethical second, and the physical third. And theology is last in
physics. (1035b) That is why the teaching of theology has been called a
'final revelation'." But in practice he usually puts this topic, which he
says ought to put last, at the beginning of his every ethical enquiry. For
manifestly he never utters a word on any topic-the goal of life, justice,
good and bad things, marriage, child-rearing, law, citizenship-without
prefacing his remarks (just as those who introduce decrees in public
assemblies preface their remarks with invocations of Good Fortune) with
references to Zeus, fate, providence, and stating that the cosmos is one
and finite, being held together by a single power. And none of this can
be believed, (1035c) except by someone who is thoroughly immersed in
physics. So listen to what he says about these matters in book three of
On Gods: "for one can find no other starting point or origin for justice
except the one derived from Zeus and that derived from the common
nature; for everything like this must take that as its starting point, if we
are going to say anything at all about good and bad things." And again
in his Propositions in Physics: "there is no other, and certainly no more
appropriate, way to approach the discussion of good and bad things or
the virtues or happiness, <except> on the basis of common nature and
the administration of the cosmos." A bit further on again, "for the
discussion of good and bad things must be linked to them, since there
is no better starting point or reference point and since the study of
physics is not to be taken up for any other reason than to distinguish
good from bad."
254                                                          //-114 to //-115

Plutarch On Stoic Self-Contradictions                                [11-114]
1037c-1038c (SVF 3.520,175,674,179;
2.171,724)

   (1037c) ... They say that a [morally] perfect action is what the law
commands and that a [moral] mistake is what the law forbids, and that
is why the law forbids the foolish to do many things (1037d) but com-
mands them to do nothing; for they are unable to perform a [morally]
perfect action. And who is not aware that it is impossible for someone
who cannot perform a [morally] perfect action to avoid making a [moral]
mistake? So [the Stoics] put the law in conflict with itself by commanding
what they are unable to do and forbidding what they are unable to refrain
from. For the man who cannot be temperate cannot avoid being wanton,
and he who cannot be prudent cannot avoid acting imprudently. Indeed,
they themselves say that those who forbid say one thing, forbid another
and command yet another. For he who says "do not steal" says just this,
"do not steal", (1037e) forbids <stealing and commands> not stealing. So
the law won't be forbidding base men to do anything if it is not giving
them a command. Moreover, they say that the doctor commands his
apprentice to cut and burn, with the omission [of the specification] that
he should do so at the right time and in the right manner, just as the
music master [commands his student] to play the lyre or sing with the
omission [of the specification] that they do so tunefully and harmoniously.
The reason why they punish the students who do these things inartistically
and badly is that they were ordered to act on the understanding that it
be done so properly, but they did not act properly. Therefore, when the
wise man commands his servant to do or say something and punishes
him for doing it at the wrong time or in the wrong manner, obviously
he too is commanding him to an intermediate act and not a [morally]
perfect act. But if wise men command base men to perform intermediate
acts, (1037f) why can the commands of the law not be like this? And
indeed, impulse, according to [Chrysippus] is the reason of man com-
manding him to act, as he wrote in his treatise On Law. Therefore, an
impulse away from something is reason forbidding, <and so is avoidance,
for it is reasonable, since it is the opposite of desire; and according to
him caution> is reasonable avoidance. (1038a) So caution, then, is reason
which forbids the wise man [to do something]. For being cautious is
special to the wise man and does not belong to base men. So if the wise
man's reason is distinct from the law, then the wise men will have their
caution, i.e., their reason, in conflict with law. But if law is nothing other
than the wise man's reason, then the law is found to be forbidding wise
men to do those things which they are cautious about.
Ethics                                                                  255

   Chrysippus says that nothing is useful to base men, and that the base
man makes use of nothing and needs nothing. After saying this in book
one of his On [Morally] Perfect Actions he goes on to say later that utility
and gratitude extend to intermediate actions, none of which is useful
according to the Stoics. (1038b) Moreover, he also says that nothing is
congenial or fitting for the base, in following words: "similarly, nothing
is alien to the virtuous man and nothing is congenial to the base man,
since one of these properties is good and the other is bad." So why does
he grind on in every single book on physics, and even, by Zeus! on ethics,
writing that as soon as we are born we are congenial to ourselves and to
our parts and to our offspring? And in book one of On Justice he says
that even beasts find their offspring congenial in accordance with the
needs of the offspring, except in the case of fish; for even the unhatched
eggs are nourished by themselves. (1038c) But there is no sense-percep-
tion for those to whom nothing is perceptible and there is no congeniality
for those to whom nothing is congenial. For congeniality seems to be a
perception and grasp of what is congenial.

Sextus Empiricus M 11.22-30 (SVF 3.75)                             [11-115]

   22. The Stoics cling to the common conceptions and define the good
as follows: "good is benefit or what is not other than benefit." By benefit
they mean virtue and virtuous action, and by not other than benefit they
mean the virtuous man and a friend. 23. For since virtue is the leading
part of the soul in a certain state, and virtuous action is an activity in
accordance with virtue, they are immediately beneficial. And the virtuous
man and the friend, who themselves belong to the class of good things,
would not properly be termed benefit, but neither would they be other
than benefit, for the following reason. 24. For, the followers of the Stoics
say, the parts are not the same as the whole nor are they different in
kind from the whole; for example, the hand is not the same as the whole
man (for the hand is not a whole man), nor is it other than the whole,
since the entire man is conceived of as a man together with his hand.
So, since virtue is a part of the virtuous man and of the friend, and the
parts are neither the same as the whole nor other than the whole, it is
said that the virtuous man and the friend are not other than benefit.
Consequently, every good thing is encompassed by the definition, whether
it is immediately a benefit or is not other than benefit.
   25. Hence and consequently they say that good is said in three senses;
and they outline each of its meanings in its own formulation. For one
sense of good, they say, is that by which or from which it is possible to
be benefitted, which is indeed the most fundamental sense and is [the
256                                                          //-115 to //-117

same as] virtue; for from this as from a spring every other utility naturally
flows. 26. In another sense it is that according to which being benefitted
is a characteristic result. In this not only will the virtues be called good
but also virtuous actions, since it is characteristic of them that benefit
results. 27. In the third and final sense good is said to be that which is
such as to benefit, this description encompassing the virtues, virtuous
actions, friends, virtuous men and gods and excellent daimons .... 30.
. . . and there were some who said that the good is that which is worth
choosing for its own sake; and some who used this definition: "good is
that which contributes to happiness"; and others who said that it is "that
which fulfils happiness". And happiness is, according to definition given
by the followers ofZeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus, a smooth flow of life.

Sextus Empiricus M 11.61-67 (SVF 3.122)                             [11-116]

   61. In the third and final sense the indifferent is that which contributes
neither to happiness nor to misery, and it is in this sense that they say
that health and disease and everything bodily and most external things
are indifferent, since they tend to produce neither happiness nor misery.
For that which can be used well and badly would be indifferent. Virtue
is always used well; vice is always used badly; but health and bodily
things can be used sometimes well and sometimes badly, and that is why
they would be indifferent. 62. And of indifferents, they say, some are
preferred and some are rejected; the preferred are those which have
considerable value, the rejected are those which have considerable dis-
value, and neither preferred nor rejected are things like holding one's
finger straight or crooked and everything like this. 63. Health and strength
and beauty, wealth and reputation and things like these, are counted
among the preferred things; disease and poverty and pain and similar
things are counted among the rejected. That is what the Stoics say.
   64. Ariston of Chios said that health and everything similar to it are
not preferred indifferents. For to say that it is a preferred indifferent is
tantamount to claiming that it is good, since they practically differ only
in name. 65. In general, things which are indifferent as between virtue
and vice are indistinguishable, nor are some naturally preferred and
others naturally rejected; rather [they vary] in accordance with different
circumstances and occasions. Thus things which are said to be preferred
are not unconditionally preferred, nor are things called rejected uncondi-
tionally rejected. 66. Anyway, if it were necessary for healthy men to
serve a tyrant and for this reason to be executed, while sick men were
released from service and so also freed from destruction, the wise man
would choose sickness over health on such an occasion. And in this way
Ethics                                                                  257

health is not unconditionally a preferred thing, nor is disease rejected.
67. So just as when we write words we sometimes put one letter first,
sometimes another, fitting them to their different circumstances (we write
the D first for Dion's name, the I first for Ion, the 0 first for Orion); it
is not that some letters are naturally preferred to others, but just that
circumstances force us to do this. In the same way in matters which are
intermediate between virtue and vice there is no natural preference for
one set over the other, but this, rather, is determined by circumstances.

Galen On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and                          [11-117]
Plato 4.2.9-18 (5.368-370 K; SVF 3.462)
   We shall see this more clearly if we quote his own [Chrysippus']
utterances. The first passage goes like this: "We must first keep in mind
that the rational animal is by nature such as to follow reason and to act
according to reason as a guide. Nevertheless, he often moves toward
some things and away from some things in another way, disobediently
to reason, when he is pushed too far [or to excess]. Both definitions [of
passion, the one mentioning] the natural motion which arises irrationally
in this way and [the one mentioning] the excessiveness in the impulses,
are in terms of this motion. For this irrationality must be taken to be
disobedient to reason and turning its back on reason. And it is in terms
of this motion that we also say in ordinary usage that some people are
'pushed' and 'moved irrationally without reason and judgement'. For we
do not use these expressions as if someone is moved mistakenly and
because he overlooks something that is according to reason, but most
especially according to the motion he [Zeno?] outlines, since the rational
animal does not naturally move in accordance with his soul in this way,
but rather in accordance with reason .... The excess of the impulse was
also spoken of in terms of this, because they overstep the symmetry of
impulses which is proper to themselves and natural. What I say would
be made easier to understand by means of these examples. In walking
according to impulse the motion of the legs is not excessive but is in a
sense coextensive with the impulse, so that it can come to a standstill
when he [the walker] wishes, or change direction. But in the case of
those who are running according to impulse, this sort of thing is no
longer the case, but the motion of the legs exceeds the impulse so that
it is carried away and does not change direction obediently in this way
as soon as they start to do so. I think something similar to these motions
[of the legs] occurs in the impulses because of the overstepping of the
symmetry which is according to reason, so that whenever one has an
impulse he is not obedient with respect to it, the excess being beyond
258                                                          //-117 to //-121

the impulse in the case of running and beyond reason in the case of
impulse. For the symmetry of natural impulse is that according to reason
and is as far as reason thinks proper. Therefore, since the overstepping
is according to this [sc. standard] and in this way, the impulse is said to
be excessive and an unnatural and irrational motion of the soul."


Galen On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and                           [11-118]
Plato 4.4.16-18, 24-25 (5.385-387 K;
SVF 3.476)
   Chrysippus himself shows this in the following quotation: "That is
why it is not off the mark to say, as some people do, that a passion of
the soul is an unnatural motion, as is the case with fear and desire and
things like that. For all such motions and conditions are disobedient to
reason and reject it. And so we say that such people are irrationally
moved, not as though they make a bad calculation, which would be the
sense opposite to 'reasonably', but rather in the sense of a rejection of
reason." ... 4.4.24 "That is what such conditions are like, uncontrolled,
as though they were not masters of themselves but were carried away in
the manner as those who run strenuously are swept away and cannot
control their motion. But those who move according to reason, as though
it were their leader, and steer their course by it wherever it might lead,
these people are in control of this sort of motion and the impulses that
go with it."


Plutarch On Moral Virtue 446f-447a                                  [11-119]
(SVF 3.459)
   But some say that passion is not something distinct from reason, and
that there is no disagreement and strife between two things, but that the
reason which is a single thing turns in both directions, (447a) and this
escapes our notice because of the sharpness and speed of the change,
since we do not realize that it is the same thing in the soul which gives
us the ability to desire and to regret, to get angry and to fear, to be drawn
to shameful acts by pleasure and to fight back against this temptation. For
they say that desire and anger and fear and all such things are bad
opinions and judgments, and that they do not arise in some one part of
the soul, but are cases of the inclination, yielding, assent and impulse of
the leading part of the soul, and in general are activities which can change
in a very short time, just as the charging around of children is violent,
very unstable and uncertain because of their weakness.
Ethics                                                                   259

Galen On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and                           [11-120]
Plato 5.1.4, 4.3.2 (5.429, 5.377 K; SVF 1.209)
   In book one of his On Passions Chrysippus tries to show that the
passions are certain judgements [formed] by the leading part of the soul,
but Zeno did not believe that the passions were the judgements themselves
but contractions, relaxations, elations and depressions which supervene
on the judgements .... 4.3.2 [Chrysippus] is in conflict with Zeno on
this point, and with himself and many other Stoics who did not suppose
that the passions of the soul were judgments of the soul but rather the
irrational contractions, depressions, 'bites', elations and relaxations which
follow those [judgements].

Galen On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and                           [11-121]
Plato 5.2.49-5.3.8 (5.444-447 K; SVF 2.841)
   [Chrysippus said,] "There do exist parts of the soul out of which the
reason in it and the disposition in [the reason] are composed. And the
soul is honourable or shameful in accordance with the condition of its
leading part with respect to its proper divisions." What are these proper
divisions, Chrysippus, which will you write about next to get us out of
our difficulties? But you did not explain this here or in any of your books;
but just as though the whole central issue of the discussion of the passions
did not turn on this point, you immediately give up on teaching it and
drag out your discussion with irrelevant considerations. But you ought
to stick to the point and indicate just what these parts of the reasoning
part of the soul are. But since you have abandoned the argument-
whether intentionally or inadvertently I cannot guess-1 shall try to
follow your doctrines and discover your intention and then to consider
its truth, and I shall take my start from the passage just quoted, which
is: "There do exist parts of the soul out of which the reason in it is
composed." Perhaps you are reminding us of what you wrote in your
On Rational Discourse, where you explained that reason is an aggregation
of certain conceptions and basic grasps. But if you think that each of the
conceptions and basic grasps is a part of the soul, then you are making
two mistakes. First of all, you should not have said that they were parts
of soul but parts of reason, just as you have written in your On Rational
Discourse. For surely soul and reason are not the same thing; besides,
you proved in the preceding discussion that reason too is one of the
components in the soul-and the soul and a component in it are not the
same. And second, even if we let this first point go by without refutation,
still one should not call conceptions and basic grasps parts of the soul
but rather activities. But nothing is composed of its proper activities,
260                                                         //-121 to ///-1

neither the eye nor the ear nor the hand nor the leg nor any other bodily
organ .... 5.3.7 For conceptions and basic grasps are activities of the
soul, but its parts, as you yourself explain elsewhere, are the auditory
pneuma and the visual pneuma, and again the vocal in addition to these
and the reproductive, but above all the leading part of the soul, of which
you said that the reason is a component and which is the part [of the
soul] in virtue of which (more than any other part) you say that the
shameful and the honourable come to inhere in it.








